Main Seaweed farming, growing at ~7.3% yr −1 , accounts for about half the total mariculture production 1 providing an opportunity to advance multiple sustainable development goals (SDGs) 2 . These include climate action 2 , with seaweed farming considered an emerging option within Blue Carbon 3 , a strategy to mitigate climate change through the conservation and restoration of vegetated coastal habitats 4 . The climate mitigation capacity from protecting and restoring those Blue Carbon habitats is estimated at ~3% of the removal of global GHG emissions required to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement 5 . However, seaweed farming can be conducted sustainably over expansive areas estimated to be as large as 677.832 km 2 by 2050 1 . If achieving this scale, seaweed farming could deliver the removal of an estimated 0.24 PgCO 2 e yr −1 stored in sediments below the farms 1 . However, these estimates are hypothetical, based on indirect assumptions, as there is, to-date, not a single published empirical estimate of carbon burial in sediments below seaweed farms. Wild algal forests extend over 7.2 million km 2 and have a global production of ~1.32 PgC yr −1 (ref. 6 ), sequestering an estimated 634 TgCO 2 e yr −1 , which is as much as mangroves, seagrass and saltmarshes combined 7 . Seaweeds release a substantial fraction of their net primary production (NPP) as both dissolved and particulate organic carbon, exporting, on average, ~43% of their NPP 8 . However, as most algal forests grow on exposed rocky shores, the production exported is advected far away, with seaweed carbon detected in the open sea and deep sea 7 , 9 , 10 . In contrast, seaweed farms, while placed in heterogeneous locations, are frequently suspended over soft sediments in bays sheltered from ocean swells, which provides a potential depositional environment where organic carbon detached from the seaweed can be buried in sediments below the farm. Assuming seaweed farms to behave as wild seaweed populations, ref. 11 calculated that seaweed farms could sequester ~11% of their NPP 7 or ~3.5 tCO 2 ha −1 yr −1 , assuming relatively high farm yields. However, this potential has not yet been quantified. Here, we provide a first assessment of organic carbon burial in sediments below seaweed farms based on a global study including 20 seaweed farms, none of them designed to sequester carbon, located in 11 nations across all continents. Our study supports the hypothesis that most seaweed farms bury carbon in the underlying sediments and that sustainable seaweed farming may contribute to climate change mitigation as a co-benefit while meeting several other SDGs 2 . Seaweed farms The farms in our study (Fig. 1 ) ranged widely in size, from very small farms with one or a few hectares farmed in Western nations to a 150 km 2 farm in Ningde, China, which can be seen from space (Tables 1 and 2 ). The farms ranged in age from just a few years to 320 years of operation in Tokyo Bay, Japan (Tables 1 and 2 ), while the recent nature of the small farms in Europe and North America reflects the incipient nature of seaweed farming in most Western nations (Tables 1 and 2 ). The studied farms included 12 of the most important farmed seaweed species, ranging from large, slow-growing kelps ( Saccharina latissima ) to fast-growing sea lettuce ( Ulva spp . ). Current yields ranged from 1 to 150 t fresh weight (fw) ha −1 yr −1 (Tables 1 and 2 ), resulting from one crop per year in high-latitude farms to six per year in Indonesia. Concessions or leases are often much larger than the cropped area, and farmers usually set generous spacing among the seaweed lines to prevent the spread of disease, maximize seaweed growth and ease operations, resulting in reduced seaweed yield per hectare. Fig. 1: Location of the sampled seaweed farms, the time (years) elapsed since the onset of farming and the size of the harvested area (ha). The orange square in Asia shows the area highlighted in the insert. Shapefile of the world and countries sampled from www.naturalearthdata.com and ocean bathymetry from GEBCO www.gebco.net . See also Tables 1 and 2 . Full size image Table 1 Time of operation and carbon accumulation and burial rate in seaweed farms Full size table Table 2 General characteristics of the seaweed farms studed Full size table The settings of the farms ranged from sites with strong currents and exposure to waves, such as those in Norway, Korea and Indonesia, which maximize nutrient supply and, therefore, seaweed growth, but export, rather than accumulate, materials, to sheltered bays in Canada. Depth also varied from intertidal farms in China and Indonesia to farms located over 30 m of water in Norway and Canada (Tables 1 and 2 ). Accordingly, the sediments below the farms ranged from muddy to gravel, with coarse sediments indicative of exposed sites ( χ 2 , P = 0.008) and environments exporting, rather than retaining materials, including seaweed fragments. Sediment accumulation and burial Sedimentation rates could be resolved on the basis of 210 Pb concentration profiles in 11 of the 20 farms sampled (Supplementary Table 1 ). Five farms showed negligible sedimentation rates, suggesting that they were set in environments that export rather than accumulate materials (Table 1 ). Four farms had 210 Pb concentration profiles that denoted either mixing, probably due to bioturbation, or sedimentation rates too high to be resolved with the sediment core length collected 12 (Table 1 ). The thickness of the sediment layer deposited during the operation of the farm increased with farm age (Fig. 2a ) for those farms placed within depositional environments. Hence, the sediment layer deposited during farm operations was very thin (0–1.1 cm) in farms in Europe and North America, where seaweed farming is a recent development. In contrast, the sediment layer deposited during the operation of the Tokyo Bay farm (Japan), the oldest (320 years of operation) farm located in a depositional environment, reached an estimated 369 cm of thickness (Tables 1 and 2 ). Fig. 2: Duration of farming operation and sediment C accumulation. a , b , The relationship between the duration of farming operation and: the thickness of the sediment layer deposited ( a ); the C org stock accumulated per unit farm area ( b ). Solid lines represent the fitted least-squares linear regression analysis equations: log 10 accumulated sediment thickness (mm) = 0.06 + 1.39 (± 0.19) log 10 farm age (yr) ( R 2 = 0.84, F = 54.2, n = 12, P = 0.0000000543) ( a ); log 10 C org accumulated (tC ha −1 ) = −0.96 + 1.21 (± 0.16) log 10 farm age (yr) ( R 2 = 0.61, F = 21.9, n = 16, P = 0.0004) ( b ). Full size image Sediment organic carbon (C org ) concentration averaged (± s.e.) 0.85 ± 0.19% of dry weight across farms (median 0.53, range 0.10–2.40%; Table 1 ). Two-thirds of the farms contained elevated C org below the farm for the period of operation relative to reference sediments beyond the farm or sediment layers deposited before the operation of the farms (Wilcoxon ranked paired test, P < 0.05; Table 1 ). The C org stock accumulated during farm operations ranged from 0.19 to 140 tC ha −1 in farms set over depositional environments, increasing with the timespan of farm operation (Fig. 2b and Table 1 ) and tended to exceed the C org stock accumulated over the same time in reference sites away from or before farm operations (Wilcoxon ranked paired test, P < 0.005; Table 1 ). Organic carbon burial rates in the depositional sediments below the farms averaged (± s.e.) 1.87 ± 0.73 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 (median 0.83 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 , range 0.10–8.99 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 ), and showed a weak tendency to increase with increasing current farm yield (Fig. 3a ) and exceed C org burial rates in reference sites away from the farm or before farm operations (Wilcoxon ranked paired test, P < 0.005; Fig. 3b ). The excess C org burial relative to reference sediments, attributable to the operation of the seaweed farm, averaged (± s.e.) 1.06 ± 0.74 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 (median 0.09 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 , range −0.13–8.10 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 ). Fig. 3: Carbon burial and farm yield. a , b , The relationship between the C org burial in sediments below the farm and the current farm yield ( a ) and the C org burial in reference sediments ( b ). The solid line in a represents the fitted least-squares linear regression analysis equations—C org burial (tC ha −1 yr −1 ) = 0.052 + 0.0114 (± 0.003) yield (t fw ha −1 yr −1 ) ( R 2 = 0.52, F = 10.9, n = 12, P = 0.0078) and that in b shows the 1:1 line. Empty symbols in b denote farms where reference values were obtained from sediment layers deposited before farm operation. Full size image Discussion The results presented are direct, empirical estimates of carbon burial in sediments attributable to the operation of seaweed farms. In contrast to Europe and North America, where seaweed farms are small and young, seaweed farming is a centenary practice in Asia, particularly in Japan, where the farm in Tokyo Bay, in operation for 320 years, had accumulated an impressive 369 cm layer of sediment containing 56 tC org ha −1 . The average rate of carbon burial in sediments below seaweed farms reported here is within the lower range of modelled values (in Norway, Broch et al. 13 ), and within the range based on the expected carbon export from seaweed farms 14 , 15 and ~10% burial efficiency (percentage of carbon deposited in the seafloor that is buried in sediments 16 , 17 ). The estimated carbon burial due to seaweed farming provides only a partial assessment of the role of seaweed farming in carbon sequestration, as particulate organic carbon detached from seaweeds may be outwelled beyond the footprint of the farm by advective and turbulent mixing, as shown for seagrass meadows 18 and mangroves 19 , and because seaweed also export dissolved organic carbon that may reach the deep sea 7 , 20 . Further, this average carbon burial below seaweed farms corresponds to ~39–33% of the estimated average carbon burial in seagrass and mangrove sediments, respectively 4 . Applying the average total carbon burial below seaweed farms found in our study (1.87 ± 0.73 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 ) to the estimated present global area of seaweed farms of 1,983 km 2 in 2020 2 implies that sediments below seaweed farms may currently bury ~0.4 MtCO 2 e annually, which could grow, following current practice, to 140 MtCO 2 e annually if seaweed farming expanded at the upper growth rate to reach 677.832 km 2 by 2050 2 , if all these area could be deployed in depositional environments, which is yet to be assessed. These estimates need be corrected for the background carbon burial in reference sediments to assess the carbon removal ‘additionality’ contributed by the seaweed farms, which represents about half of the total carbon burial below seaweed farms (Table 1 ). The estimate of the excess C org buried in sediments below farms represents a crude approximation of the ‘additionality’ to carbon burial contributed by seaweed farms, and cannot be considered to be equivalent to carbon sequestration. This is because the use of reference sediments, whether away or before the farm operations started, involves a series of assumptions; that is, that all conditions are equal away from the farm except for the absence of the farm, and that there have been no changes in background carbon burial nor greater remineralization since the farm operations started, respectively, which may not be met for all farms. Our estimates integrate carbon stocks from the onset of farming at the various sites to present, and, therefore, address different timescales. Carbon sequestration for carbon accounting purposes also requires demonstrating a permanence of carbon burial at a timescale of 100 years or longer. This exceeds the lifespan of many of the farms. Hence, we cannot rule out that further remineralization of organic matter may occur, which may lower the carbon sequestration rates relative to the burial rates calculated here. Likewise, the stock accumulated over the top millimetres of the sediment is still undergoing decomposition. However, the C org profiles of the sediment corers do not generally show an extended exponential decline, which would be indicative of significant decomposition rates. On the other hand, carbon burial below the farm represents just one component of the potential contribution to carbon sequestration of particulate organic carbon released by the farmed seaweed, which may include burial of carbon in sediments beyond the farm, export of recalcitrant carbon and sequestration of particulate and dissolved organic carbon released by seaweed advected to the deep sea 7 , 20 . Contributions from carbonate production/dissolution of biota associated with seaweed farms, not quantified here, may also affect their net CO 2 budgets, although short production cycles (<6 months) are unlikely to allow for development of a sizeable calcifier community in seaweed farms. In fact, these calcifying organisms, for example, bryozoans or periwinkles, represent biofouling that reduces the quality and value of the seaweed products and are strategically avoided in standard farm operations. Detailed assessments of contemporary carbon fluxes in seaweed farms (air–sea CO 2 flux, sedimentation rates, degradation rates, carbon exports and allochthonous inputs) can provide supportive details to the carbon budget, however they would not have helped further constrain our estimates of carbon burial rates. Our estimates are averaged across the operational lifespan of the farms, exceeding a century in some cases, which resolve long-term carbon burial rates. In contrast, air–sea CO 2 fluxes, often recommended to provide robust metrics of carbon removal by ecosystems 10 , 21 , do not deliver carbon sequestration for seaweed farms as they include carbon incorporated into harvested biomass, that in many cases is recycled as CO 2 emissions when the biomass is eventually used or consumed post-harvest, and thus would overestimate carbon sequestration in seaweed farms. The reason for this is that seaweed farmers maximize the share of NPP they harvest, which is, therefore, not available to be processed in the ecosystem. As a result, GHG emissions resulting from uses of the crop, for example as food, are not captured in the net air–sea CO 2 exchange, which provides, therefore, an overestimate of carbon sequestration capacity by the seaweed farms. Previous inferences of carbon sequestration of seaweed farms based on air–sea CO 2 exchange, which show an uptake of atmospheric CO 2 in seaweed farms 22 , 23 , are, therefore, biased by the removal of the accumulated biomass as explained above, and thus are overestimating carbon sequestration in farms relative to wild seaweed forests 10 , 24 . This, however, does not detract from the benefits of seaweed farms in providing local refugia from ocean acidification and deoxygenation 23 . Our approach prioritized the assessment of C org burial below seaweed farms across regions over the detailed assessment required to retrieve robust, integrated estimates for specific farms, as we focused on resolving the order-of-magnitude and variability of carbon burial rates in sediments below seaweed farms, for which no previous direct estimate was available. Detailed assessments at the farm scale will require: (1) additional detailed sampling to quantify the variability across the sediments underlaying the farm; (2) a detailed consideration of environmental variables in terms of carbon inputs and exports and the supporting hydrological flows; and (3) resolving the carbon budget of the seaweed farm. Further, we considered that additional efforts to estimate present-day carbon flows would not have added significant strength to the results, as it cannot be assumed that these would have been representative, qualitatively or quantitatively, for the long-term flows relevant to our carbon burial estimates. Indeed, our results reflect carbon burial over the lifespan of the farms, spanning in some cases over centuries. The methods used here are only effective for seaweed farms in operation, as they can only be applied retrospectively. There is, therefore, a need to develop protocols that can be applied to verify carbon burial in sediments below newly established seaweed farms, which should adopt a before-and-after control impact (BACI) design 25 . A BACI design is particularly robust when treatments, that is reference versus farm, cannot be selected randomly and are driven by permitting or licensing processes. This approach, combined with robust controls, can help to overcome the problems faced here when choosing either sediments beyond the farm or sediments deposited before the farm was established as references to assess additionality of C org burial attributable to the seaweed farms. Our findings represent an important step towards quantifying the climate mitigation co-benefits of seaweed farming. Estimates of carbon burial in sediments below seaweed farms should be included in carbon footprint calculations of the seaweed crop, which show, even without including this component, that seaweeds rank among the farmed food with the lowest carbon footprint 26 . Our results inform two components required to eventually consider the possibility of issuing Blue Carbon credits from seaweed farming: (1) additionality, quantified here, as a crude approximation, as excess carbon burial relative to reference sediments and (2) permanence, as shown from the long-term accumulating of C org documented for the oldest farms in our study. However, permanence requires a commitment to store C org buried against credits for at least a century, which is much longer than the term of most concessions, requiring further management assurances. In addition, robust protocols to verify additional carbon burial below seaweed farms need be developed, as retrospective approaches, such as those used here, cannot be applied to new or recent farms. Moreover, expansion of seaweed farming must be done carefully, based on marine spatial planning informed by hydrological models, to maximize benefits and avoid negative impacts 2 , 27 . Our results suggest that operating seaweed farms at high yield in concessions placed in depositional environments, as reflected by the presence of organic-rich sediments, may yield carbon sequestration rates up to fourfold above the average values reported here. The climate benefits of seaweed farming could be enhanced further by efforts to reduce life-cycle emissions and by using the crop retrieved to displace fossil fuels, such as their use as biofuel, biochar or using seaweed carbon in durable products. Sinking seaweed in the deep sea has been proposed as a path to maximize the climate benefits of seaweed farming 28 . However, this practice may have unintended consequences on the marine ecosystem, while depriving society of the benefits that seaweed crops bring about towards supporting SDGs 2 . Consequently, sinking seaweed in the deep sea is not a recommended option 29 , 30 . The results presented do not suffice for considering the development of carbon credits from seaweed farming, but provide a useful first step towards exploring that possibility. In the same way that Blue Carbon strategies drew on lessons learned from earlier and more mature frameworks for carbon removal concepts on land forests 4 , the role of seaweed farming in potentially contributing to climate change mitigation can be informed from the learnings of the more mature discussions on how C org increase in agricultural soils can contribute to climate mitigation 31 . In particular, consideration of agricultural soil C org storage as a nature-based solution has already found solutions to address issues of heterogeneity, uncertainty, additionality and non-permanence 31 , which are also challenges for the entire agriculture, forestry and other land use sector. Furthering the research presented here, and resolving other possible components of carbon sequestration with seaweed farming, such as the release and long-term storage of refractory dissolved C org 32 will contribute to possibly allow the formulation of carbon credits inspired by models developed for agricultural soils, such as temporary and conditional credits 32 . As the value of carbon credits is projected to raise rapidly over the next years 33 , the economic benefits of managing seaweed farms for carbon sequestration will increase in the future and may become, if farmers are compensated for this service, an additional incentive for the expansion of sustainable seaweed farming. However, we submit that, as agricultural production, seaweed farming should be mainly directed to feed humans and/or farmed animals, and should not be treated as a climate geoengineering tool 29 , 30 . The relatively modest climate mitigation benefits of seaweed farming identified by our results should be considered one more co-benefit to the primary role of seaweed farming in food supply. Documented co-benefits include, in many cases, enhancing biodiversity 34 , providing local refugia from ocean acidification and deoxygenation 23 , along with multiple social benefits, including poverty alleviation and employment 2 . Indeed, the farms in this study collectively employ about 27,000 farmers, corresponding to an average of 1.4 employees per farmed hectare. This provides evidence of the significance of seaweed farming in supporting livelihoods and community resilience in many nations. Further, seaweed farming provided food and much-needed economic relief to the farmers in our study when the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted other sources of income. For instance, a community heavily dependent on tourism in Bali, Indonesia, switched to seaweed farming to sustain their livelihoods as a result of the collapse of tourism during the COVID-19 pandemic 35 . Our results provide direct assessment of carbon burial below seaweed farms, with an average of 1.87 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 and a maximum, for the set of farms sampled across the world, of 8.99 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 , which are reduced when using a crude approximation to calculate additionality to 1.06 and 8.10 tCO 2 e ha −1 yr −1 , respectively. Seaweed farming can be scaled up sustainably to extend over an ocean space many times larger than the current area 2 . We recommend that knowledge gaps required to assess the climate benefits of seaweed farming across the entire life cycle of the products and other requirements embedded in carbon credits 36 be assessed before policies are put in place to incentivize climate change mitigation as a co-benefit of seaweed farming. Methods Sampling A network of 20 seaweed farms worldwide was assembled, usually including a local research team operating under standardized protocols. The current species farmed and the recent yields were provided by the farm operators for each farm, along with the time since farming operations started. The oldest and largest farms available were selected for sampling, although relatively recent and small farms in Europe and North America, where seaweed farming is a recent development, were included. For each of the selected farms we defined a ‘farm’ site as representing a site that is likely to receive continuous inputs of any materials detached from the farm; and a ‘reference’ site as representing a site that is as similar as possible in conditions (for example, depth and overall environmental conditions, such as exposure) as the farm site, but sufficiently far away as to be unlikely that materials from the farm may settle there. The farm site was typically located below the centre of the farm area, where ‘edge’ effects will be minimal. Where the farm area shifted over time, the farm site represented the area that best represents the centre across years (that is, consistently covered by the farm). Where significant directional current occurred and depth was significant (>10 m), the farm site was displaced relative to the centre of the farm along the direction of the prevailing current, as settling materials will be advected along that direction, rather than falling vertically. Both sites were also located away from known disturbances to the sediment, that can mix or rework the sediments, such as anchoring systems. The distance between the centre of farms and the reference sites outside the farm was considerable for the larger farms, which occupied all the suitable environment for seaweed farming. As a result, areas away from the farms often differed in physical conditions, reflected in differences in the characteristics of sediments compared to those below the farms. Hence, sediments away from the farm did not always provide an appropriate reference to compare the effect of seaweed farming on C org stocks and burial rates. In cases where differences in sediment properties prevailed, and the suggested reference sediments could not be compared to sediments below the farm, we compared the upper part of the sediment cores corresponding to sediment accumulated since the farm started operating and the lower part corresponding to sediment accumulated before operations, where the sediment cores reached to this layer (Supplementary Table 1 ). A total of three sediment cores, ranging in length from 60 cm to 1.5 m and 6–10 cm in diameter, were collected at each of the farm sites and two additional cores were collected at the reference sites, when possible just before the crop was harvested. Cores were collected by scuba divers at most farms, but for deep farms the use of a vibracorer operated from a vessel equipped with an A-frame was necessary. As sampling was set to be initiated in March 2020, COVID-19 restrictions led to significant constraints in accessing the sites for research teams because of confinement and restriction measures under COVID-19, which were severe in some of the participating farms, such as those in China and Japan. Hence, sediment sampling elapsed between March 2020 and June 2022, depending on farms. The farm in the United States was sampled twice, and the average values from the two sampling events are provided. The effective length of sediment retrieved ranged between 9 cm on the farm in Norway, a very recent one, to 124 cm on a farm in Japan, where the farms sampled have been in operation over centuries. The cores retrieved were sliced at 0.5 cm intervals for the top 10 cm, 1 cm intervals for 10–20 cm and 2 cm intervals down to the base of the core. The wet weight of the slices was determined and they were then dried at 60–70 °C until constant weight. Dried samples were then shipped to the laboratories for analyses. Organic carbon was determined at the Andalusian Institute of Earth Sciences (Granada, Spain) and 210 Pb concentrations were determined, at Edith Cowan University (Perth, Australia) and the Marine Environment Laboratories of the UN International Atomic Energy Agency in Monaco. Chemical analyses Upon reception in the laboratories, sediment samples were dried again at 70 °C to remove any water absorbed during the shipment and subsequently pulverized/homogenized. An aliquot was treated with HCl (1:1) to remove carbonates. The residual sample was washed (five times) with MiliQ water, dried and homogenized again, to analyse the percentage of organic carbon. Acid treatment and washing may have removed some soluble C org , such as soluble polysaccharides, possibly leading to underestimating organic carbon 37 . However, the risk in reducing acid treatment would have been to overestimate C org by failing to dissolve carbonates, that dominate sediment material in tropical sediments. Samples were accurately weighed into tin capsules and analysed in triplicate to calculate the carbon content by means of a Carlo Elba NC1500 elemental analyser coupled with a Delta Plus XP (Thermo-Finnigan) mass spectrometer (EA-IRMS). Commercial CO 2 was used as the internal standard for the carbon analyses. Mass area 44, 45 and 46 of CO 2 were used to calculate the carbon content. The concentrations of 210 Pb along each core were determined by alpha spectrometry through the measurement of its grand-daughter 210 Po, assuming radioactive equilibrium between both radionuclides 38 . Briefly, 300 mg of each sample were spiked with a precisely known amount of 209 Po and microwave digested with a mixture of concentrated HNO 3 and HF. Boric acid was then added to complex fluorides. The resulting solutions were evaporated and diluted to 100 ml of 1 M HCl and Po isotopes were plated onto pure silver discs during 8 h at 70 °C while stirring. Polonium emissions were measured by alpha spectrometry using ULTRA Ion implanted silicon charged particle detectors (ORTEC). The concentrations of supported 210 Pb were determined in several evenly distributed samples along each core by measuring the concentrations of 226 Ra by gamma spectrometry via its decay products 214 Pb and 214 Bi (in equilibrium) using well-type, high-purity germanium detectors (CANBERRA). Analyses of replicate samples and reference materials (IAEA-447) were carried out systematically to ensure the accuracy and the precision of the results for both alpha and gamma measurements. The excess 210 Pb concentration profiles were obtained by subtracting the supported 210 Pb from the total 210 Pb for each core. Data analysis Mean sedimentation rates were obtained by modelling the excess 210 Pb concentration profiles along the accumulated mass using the constant flux:constant sedimentation model 12 , 39 where possible (that is, where the excess 210 Pb concentration profile presented a decreasing trend with depth). This model, which represents a parsimonious approach that can be applied to multiple situations, uses accumulated mass (expressed in g cm −2 ) instead of linear depth (cm), obtaining the sedimentation rates in terms of mass accumulated per surface area and per time (g cm −2 yr −1 ), from which we used the concentration of C org to calculate the accumulation rate of C org . Therefore, there is no need to account for compaction of the sediment cores which may have occurred during sampling. Where a mixed layer existed in the upper layer of the sediment, sedimentation rates calculated in the underlaying layer were assumed to apply to the overlaying mixed layer 12 . Organic carbon concentrations were combined with bulk density, calculated as the ratio of the dry weight and the fresh volume of the sediment sections, to calculate carbon density and C org stocks in the sediments. For each core where the age model could be calculated, the C org burial rate since the beginning of activity of the farm was estimated using the mean sedimentation rate and the weighted average concentration of C org from the surface and down to the depth corresponding to the time elapsed since the onset of farming, as calculated from the age model. Similarly, the C org burial rate during the equivalent amount of time before the farm was operative was estimated using the mean sedimentation rate and the weighted average concentration of C org at layers below those estimated to correspond to the onset of farming operations of each sediment core collected below the seaweed farm. Then, where possible, we could compare the C org burial rates during and before operation of the farm as well with the C org burial rates outside the farms (determined from samples collected in reference sites). The thickness and carbon stock deposited during farm operations were extrapolated linearly from the sediment layer analysed (Table 2 ) when this did not include the entire operation period of the farm. Examination of sediment properties (for example, bulk density and organic concentration) showed that reference values, both those sampled beyond the farm and those retrieved from sediment layers deposited before farm operations were initiated, were imperfect proxies for the carbon burial in sediments in the absence of farming because of spatial and temporal variability. In some farms (Dongtou, China, and the farms sampled in Canada), the sediments in reference cores were of a different nature than those in the farm before the onset of farm operations, so the best reference was provided by the data from sediments deposited before the onset of farm operations, while sediments beyond the farm were used as best proxies of reference sediments for all other farms. This was not possible for very old farms or those supporting very high sedimentation rates, where the sediment horizons before the onset of farming activities were not reached. The farm in the United States was sampled twice and values reported represent an average from the two sampling events. Additional details on the data analysis for the individual cores are provided in Supplementary Table 1 . Least-squares linear regression was used to describe the relationship between variables. The relationship between accumulated carbon stock and farm age was fitted using log–log transformation to correct for heteroscedasticity in the untransformed relationship, which would otherwise violate the assumptions of linear regression analysis. The full datasets, including 210 Pb concentration and C org data, are available at ref. 40 .