Main Global climate change is happening in the form of gradual shifts in average climatic conditions as well as increasing frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events (EWEs). While EWE definitions vary 1 , narrower delimitations focus on climatological events where the value of a weather or climate variable exceeds a threshold in the upper or lower range of observed values over a given time period 2 , 3 . Examples of EWEs include heat waves, cold snaps, heavy rainfall and droughts 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 . Despite both forms of climate change dramatically affecting biological systems and exerting a heavy toll on society, most research focuses on impacts of gradual shifts in average climatic conditions 5 . Our understanding of EWEs on species and ecosystems is less well studied, especially at broader extents and across taxonomic groups 9 , 10 , 11 . Phenology—the timing of recurring seasonal activities of animals and plants—is maybe the most amenable process for tracking species and ecosystem response to climate change 12 , 13 as phenology often shows high sensitivity to environmental conditions 13 , 14 . Phenological shifts of species can have large consequences on the population dynamics of interacting species, biodiversity and ecosystem functioning 15 , 16 . As a result, a significant body of research has focused on phenological sensitivity in the face of climate change and its consequences across trophic levels 17 . Most change-oriented studies have focused on annual, seasonal or heat accumulation (for example, annual average temperature and growing degree day) metrics for understanding phenological sensitivity and change 13 , 18 , 19 . However, the major physiological challenges climate change poses are directly related to proximal stressors such as EWEs and how organisms make allocation and timing decisions in the face of those stressors 20 . For example, if larval stages of insects are too responsive to early spring heat waves, they may be more susceptible to mortality when temperatures return to normal or during cold snaps 21 . Further, if insects and plants have differential responses to extreme events, these could exacerbate cases of phenological mismatch where herbivores or pollinators mistime the availability of key resources, which has been shown to have direct demographic consequences in higher trophic levels 22 . In temperate regions, both insects and plants generally exhibit similar directional responses to annual climate variables, although the magnitude of these effects often varies across species and trophic levels 23 . Phenological responses of insects and plants to EWEs could also align, but this aspect remains underexplored. Recent work supports the importance of phenological sensitivity of species to EWEs. For example, Patterson et al. 24 found that EWEs induced earlier larvae hatching of the endangered Karner blue butterfly, causing phenological mismatch between the butterfly and its lupine host plant, leading to local extinction of the butterfly. Others 25 found that the number of extremely hot and cold days had larger impacts on moth and butterfly flight periods than average climatic variables using natural history collections of over a hundred species. Another study 9 found that severe drought and heavy rainfall affected the flower phenology of ten plant species at the same magnitude as one decade of gradual increase of average temperature in Europe. Also, Zhang et al. 26 found that the flowering times of 12 plants were affected by EWEs, with extreme precipitation being more effective in altering flowering dates than just seasonal temperature. Such studies, however, are still rare, remain narrow in terms of taxonomic and spatial scales, and rarely investigate compounding EWEs. The result is a critical knowledge gap about ecological impacts of EWEs across organisms, populations and ecosystems under current and future climate change 1 . Here we used community science data from iNaturalist to examine the importance of EWEs as acute and proximal stressors that determine how hundreds of Angiosperm plants (‘plants’ hereafter) and Lepidoptera (‘insects’ hereafter) species respond phenologically across the contiguous United States between 2016 and 2022 (Fig. 1 ). In particular, we focus on timing of plant flowering and adult insect flight, because plants interact with adult moths and butterflies, in part, for pollination, and thus our study can inform on the potential for mismatches. We use these data resources to test the following key predictions. (1) EWEs are important drivers of phenology given their roles as proximal phenological cues, especially impacting offset and duration; and that plant flowering and insect flight timing have similar responses to these events given both have been sculpted by environmental forces in the same regions over long time periods. (2) EWEs have strong interactions with average or seasonal climatic variables and with other EWEs; and that these interactions affect plants and insects similarly. Fig. 1: Map of grid cells (25 × 25 km 2 ) with both plant and Lepidoptera data used in the final analyses. The final dataset included 581 plant species and 172 Lepidoptera species. Full size image Importance of EWEs on phenology When linking predictors to phenology of plants and insects in linear mixed models (LMMs), including EWEs (daily temperature >2 s.d. from the mean daily value and absolute value of daily rainfall anomaly index >2 calculated over a 22 year time period) with average or seasonal climatic variables largely improved model performance when compared with models that included average or seasonal variables alone (Table 1 ). These results show that the effects of EWEs strongly impact phenological responses of both plants and insects. As expected, average temperature had the strongest effects on the onset (beginning), offset (ending) and duration of plant flowering and insect flight period (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1 ). EWEs, however, had comparable effect sizes on phenology to other commonly studied climatic variables such as precipitation, temperature seasonality and precipitation seasonality (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1 ). Table 1 Models that included extreme weather events were selected as the top model over those with only annual climate variables Full size table Fig. 2: Estimated impacts of annual climatic variables and EWEs on phenology for plants and insects. a – c , The points represent estimated coefficients while the horizontal lines represent their confidence intervals (CI; 95% as thin lines and 85% as thick lines) of the onset ( a ), offset ( b ) and duration ( c ) of phenology for models with annual climatic variables interacting with taxon (plant and insect) and extreme weather events interacting with taxon. Asterisks indicate that the focal environmental variable had significantly different effects on the phenology of plants and insects (that is, strong interaction between environmental variable and taxon). The lighter, transparent colours indicate that the 95% CI of a parameter includes zero (the dashed vertical line). The 85% CI is reported as it is consistent with how terms are selected under the AIC-based model selection criteria. Precip, precipitation; temp, temperature. Full size image The response of plants and insects to some annual average climate variables were different (for example, offset dates in response to average temperature; Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1 ). More often, plants and insects showed consistent responses to EWEs (Fig. 2 , Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1 ). Specifically, an increasing number of extreme warm days advanced onset, delayed offset and extended duration for both plants and insects (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 2 ). An increasing number of extreme cold days advanced the onset and extended the flight period for insects 25 while having no impact on flowering phenology of plants after accounting for other variables (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Interestingly, an increasing number of extreme wet and extreme dry days both delayed onset and offset and extended duration for plants and insects, with the responses of insects being generally stronger than in plants (Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1 ). Interactive effects of EWEs on phenology There is strong evidence that extreme weather interacts with climatic variables to affect the phenology of plants and insects (Table 1 ). The Akaike information criterion (AIC) of the model further dropped significantly (>170) for onset, offset and duration when including interactions between extreme weather and annual average climatic variables in the models described above (Table 1 ). Furthermore, some interactions between extreme weather and climatic variables vary between plants and insects (see below for examples; Supplementary Table 2 ). For onset, significant interactions were documented between extreme cold and average temperature, between extreme wet and total precipitation, between extreme dry and total precipitation, between extreme warm and extreme dry (that is, hot and dry) and between extreme warm and average temperature (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 2 ). The first four interactions were substantially different between plants and insects, with the interaction between extreme warm and average temperature being consistent between plants and insects (Fig. 3a ). As noted above, extreme cold caused earlier flight onset for insects, but climate context matters, and the impact is especially strong in warm areas (Fig. 3b ). However, extreme cold did not have a large effect on plant flowering onset (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 2 ). The impact of extreme wet delaying insect flight onset was stronger in dry areas (Fig. 3c ). Extreme dry weather further delayed insect flight onset in dry areas but slightly advanced insect flight onset in wet areas; this interaction was not significant for plants (Fig. 3d ). Extreme warm weather advanced onset in general for both plants and insects, but this impact was stronger for plants when combined with extreme dry conditions and weaker for insects (Fig. 3e ). Early- and late-season species may show differential responses to EWEs. When only early species were included, significant three-way interactions between EWEs, climatic variables and taxon still exist, although some interactive effects changed (Extended Data Fig. 1 ). For example, extreme cold now delayed insect onset in warm areas (Extended Data Fig. 1b ); the interactive effects between extreme wet and precipitation as well as between extreme warm and extreme dry were no longer different between plants and insects (Extended Data Fig. 1c,e ). Overall, models with only early species also provided strong evidence that EWEs interacted with climatic variables and other EWEs, affecting onset of plants and insects. Fig. 3: EWEs interacted with annual climatic variables and other EWEs to affect the onset (day of year) of plant flowering and flying period of insects. a , Estimated coefficients (central points) and their 95% (thin lines) and 85% (thick lines) CIs of all the significant interactions between extreme weather events and other variables. Asterisks indicate that the focal environmental variable had significantly different effects on the phenology of plants and insects. The lighter, transparent colours indicate that the 95% CI of the parameter includes zero (the dashed vertical line). b – e , All interactions among extreme weather events (extreme cold days ( b ), wet days ( c ), dry days ( d ) and warm days ( e )), climatic variables and taxon that were significantly different between plants and insects. Dashed lines in b – e indicate that the interaction was not significant for plants. The bands around each fitted line represent the 95% CI. The x axes represent the number of extreme weather days in the 60 day time period before onset (jittered rugs). Full size image For offset, two interactions had significant coefficient estimates and these interactions were consistent between plants and insects (Fig. 4a,d,e and Supplementary Table 2 ). Extreme warm in general delayed offset but the effect was stronger with more extreme wet days (Fig. 4d ). Extreme wet also delayed offset and the effect was stronger in dry areas (Fig. 4e ). The interactive effects of extreme cold and average temperature, as well as extreme warm and extreme dry, were different between plants and insects (Fig. 4b,c ). Focusing on only late flowering or flying species for offset, most patterns were unchanged although some interactions were no longer significant (Extended Data Fig. 2 ). For example, extreme warm and extreme dry still have different interactive effects on plants and insects for this submodel (Extended Data Fig. 1c ). Again, models with only late species also suggested that EWEs interacted with other variables, impacting offset of plants and insects. Fig. 4: EWEs interacted with annual climatic variables and other EWEs to affect the offset (day of year) of plant flowering and flying period of insects. a , Estimated coefficients (central points) and their 95% (thin lines) and 85% (thick lines) CIs of all the significant interactions between extreme weather events and other variables. Asterisks indicate that the focal environmental variable had significantly different effects on the phenology of plants and insects. The lighter, transparent colours indicate that the 95% CI of a parameter includes zero (the dashed vertical line). b – e , All interactions among extreme weather events (extreme cold days ( b ) and warm and dry days ( c ), warm and wet days ( d ) and wet days ( e )) climatic variables, and taxon that were significantly different between plants and insects. Dashed lines in b and c indicate that the interaction was not significant. In d and e , plants and insects share the same interaction pattern. The bands around each fitted line represent the 95% CI. The x axes represent the proportion of extreme weather days between onset dates and offset dates (rugs). Full size image For duration, extreme weather in general extended duration and again interacted with climatic variables for both plants and insects (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 2 ). Extreme warm extended duration for both plants and insects in similar ways, especially in warm areas (Fig. 5b ). Extreme cold extended insect flight duration in warm areas and shortened it in cold areas (Fig. 5c ); this interaction was not significant for plants. Extreme wet interacted with precipitation for plants but not insects (Fig. 5d ), extending plant flowering duration in general, and this effect was stronger in dry areas. Extreme dry extended plant flowering duration in dry areas but shortened the duration slightly in wet areas (Fig. 5e ); this interaction, however, was not significant for insects. When limiting to a subset of plant species that have known pollination relationships with Lepidoptera, model results were largely similar with results based on all species (Fig. 3 versus Extended Data Fig. 3 ; Fig. 4 versus Extended Data Fig. 4 ; and Fig. 5 versus Extended Data Fig. 5 ), providing compelling evidence to support the hypothesis that EWEs interact with climatic variables and other EWEs in affecting plant and insect phenology. Fig. 5: EWEs interacted with annual climatic variables and other EWEs to affect the duration (log number of days) of plant flowering and flying period of insects. a , Estimated coefficients (central points) and their 95% (thin lines) and 85% (thick lines) CIs of all the significant interactions between extreme weather events and other variables. Asterisks indicate that the focal environmental variable had significantly different effects on the phenology of plants and insects. The lighter, transparent colours (transparency) indicate that the 95% CI of a parameter includes zero (the dashed vertical line). b – e , All interactions with extreme weather events retained in the final model. Dashed lines in c – e indicate that the interaction was not significant. The bands around each fitted line represent the 95% CI. The x axes represent the proportion of extreme weather days from 60 days before onset dates to offset dates (rugs). Full size image Discussion Current macrophenological studies rarely consider EWEs and their impact on phenology. Here we have simultaneously examined impacts of multiple types of EWEs on both plant and insect phenology in the same region and time period. Our results provide overwhelming evidence that EWEs and the climate context in which they occur are crucial to understanding realized phenological response in both plants and insects. The overall importance of extreme weather events Our work clearly demonstrates that EWEs alone have a strong impact for plant and insect onset, offset and duration and that including these predictors leads to improved model fits. Unsurprisingly, extreme warm drove earlier onset, later offset and longer durations for both plants and insects, although plants had slightly stronger responsiveness. For onset, extreme warming may initiate and speed development, resulting in earlier onset in both groups 27 , 28 . Experimental and empirical observations have also shown extended flowering duration under warming generally 19 , 29 and this may extend to extreme warm conditions. Although extreme heat can cause faster metabolic rates in individuals 30 and shorter flowering duration, if not fatal, it also can help increase photosynthesis and thus energy to allocate towards reproductive events affording longer duration 31 . For insects, extreme warmth may temporarily limit flight activity and energy expenditures, resulting in maintaining activity longer when conditions improve and leading to later offsets and extended durations. Limited insect flight activity under extreme warm may also lead to extended plant flowering duration to assure eventual pollination when pollinators are scarce 32 . Warming, including extreme warmth, may extend the potential window for plants to grow and flower, leading to prolonged flowering duration. To our surprise, extreme cold was not an important driver of plant flowering phenology. We anticipated that extreme cold would delay onset timing and potentially offset for plants. Lack of sensitivity may reflect other factors not considered here, including photoperiod or heat accumulation, but could also be an indicator of belowground overwintering providing protection from extreme cold for multiple plant species examined here 33 . In stark contrast, extreme cold was always important for insects, leading to much earlier onsets, marginally earlier offsets and overall longer durations. Earlier onset was unexpected; however, extreme temperatures before onset have shown sometimes paradoxical outcomes. Recent work showed that sepsid flies exposed to non-lethal extreme cold accelerated development once temperatures warmed 34 , 35 , which could result in earlier flight onset in the natural environment, while warmer winter temperatures actually led to later onset for three out of five butterfly species in the United Kingdom 36 , which was attributed to chilling requirements needed to terminate diapause. For offsets, extreme cold in late summer or early autumn may impact physiological function contributing to early winter dormancy of insects, which is initiated by reduced temperatures and photoperiod for many species 37 . Overall, these results contrast with our recent work demonstrating that extreme cold drives later offsets for Lepidoptera, especially for multivoltine species, in the eastern United States 25 . Here we have expanded our extent to the entire continental United States, which may contribute to this outcome and, as we demonstrate below, climate context in which EWEs occur is important to understanding phenological response. The impact of extreme wet and dry is stronger than extreme warm and cold, and both extreme wet and dry lead to later onset and offset for insects and plants. However, insects show more phenological sensitivity than plants, probably driven by key requirements of larval insects to complete their life cycles and challenges, especially in water-stressed regions 38 . Offset is more impacted than onset for both groups and later offsets drive longer flowering and flight durations. Extreme dry conditions, in particular, are an especially strong driver of later insect offset. These results are counter to work by Forister et al. 39 who examined flight dynamics of lowland and higher elevation butterflies during a millennial-scale drought and found earlier onset and offset dynamics. However, similar to our results, previous studies found that both drought 9 , 40 , 41 , 42 and increased spring precipitation 43 delayed plant flowering phenology, which may be due to redistribution of energy to reproduction when under stress so that offspring can germinate when environmental conditions improve. For offset, extreme wet or dry conditions may act to limit insect foraging and pollination, ultimately leading to both delayed insect flight and plant flowering termination 9 . The importance of conditional effects on EWEs A key finding from this work is that the context under which EWEs occur is a critical component to understanding how EWEs will impact realized phenological response across different geographic areas. In particular, our results show strong context-specific responses, demonstrating how EWEs interact with average or seasonal climate conditions or with other EWEs to impact plant and insect phenology. The direction and magnitude of response to an EWE can differ completely between plants and insects, depending on context. Here we focus on three key contextual results rather than decomposing all results individually. The first result is that plant and insect onset dramatically differ in how they respond to extreme warm and dry conditions. We find strong interactions for both groups but in different directions. Extreme warm and dry conditions together lead to marginally later onset in Lepidoptera but earlier onset in plants. Extreme dry conditions in already arid conditions strongly delays adult flight onset in insects but not for plant flowering onset. For plants, this result is similar to what Crimmins et al. 44 found in an arid environment and probably reflects a survival strategy of plants to ensure complete reproductive phases under dry conditions. By contrast, it may be highly adaptive for insects to delay larval and pupal stages, and thus adult flight onset, because of their vulnerability to extreme precipitation events in dry conditions during those life stages 45 . The second key result is that, in contrast to onset results, we find more consistent and somewhat weaker plant and insect offset responses to EWEs. Offset is later with more extreme warm or wet events and extreme wet delays offset the greatest under arid conditions. We have argued above that EWEs may force both plants and insects to delay timetables for interactions such as pollination 32 ; finding that EWEs typically delay offset supports that expectation. Finally, we found that extreme events almost always lengthen the duration of phenological events, and their impacts on phenological responsiveness are strongest in warm and dry regions. For plants, but not insects, the impact of extreme precipitation is much stronger in drier regions. These results are directly related to differential onset dynamics where onsets in dry conditions are later for insects but not for plants, while dry conditions shift offset later in both insects and plants. Thus mechanisms for duration lengthening are inherent in the processes operating on both onset and offset dynamics and differential responses have the potential to impact phenological matching. Limitations While we explicitly focused on adult flight timing in Lepidoptera and flowering in Angiosperms, we did not include events that occur during insect and plant development. In insects, larval development often occurs in late winter and early spring when animals are most vulnerable to extreme weather conditions 45 and we may miss early season impacts. Second, we opted to not further complicate models by including species traits, which can be important for mediating response 25 . We did subset analyses to examine responsiveness for earlier and later season species, separately for onset and offset. Our taxon selection for the full models focused on species for which data were available, rather than selecting species with known interactions. Nevertheless, the same results hold when limiting to plant species known to be pollinated by Lepidoptera. Third, we did not investigate changes in overlap between plants and insects within assemblages because of data constraints. Results presented here were based on community-level responses of plants and insects to climatic variables which may not apply to individual plant–insect pairs. Finally, our study area spans the contiguous United States, which is not representative of all climate regimes or species, particularly polar or tropical regions. Conclusion Forecasting how plant and animal phenology responds under global change has proved challenging 13 , 46 , in part, because many models focus primarily on heat and water accumulation or average measures as predictors while ignoring variables such as EWEs. Here we show that plant and insect phenology is highly responsive to EWEs and that their responses differ in magnitude and context. Our framework and results provide useful context for further examination of EWE drivers of key phenological events across trophic levels. This in turn helps with better predicting likelihood of trophic mismatches and consequences to ecosystem services and developing effective mitigation and resilience plans in the face of climate change. Methods Phenological data We accessed the iNaturalist research-grade observations for flowering plants and Lepidoptera archived at the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) on 20 November 2023 47 . Research-grade records are those for which at least two-thirds of iNaturalist users agree with each other’s identifications 48 . For this study, we only used observations that were collected between 2016 and 2022 within the contiguous United States because this time period and extent provided the broadest coverage of phenological observations for both plants and insects and our methods require relatively dense data for estimating phenophases. Furthermore, long-term daily weather data needed to calculate extreme weather is available for this time period and area (see section on 'Climate and weather data'). We filtered records to only Angiosperm and Lepidoptera found in the contiguous United States. The use of community science resources, now commonplace for phenological studies 19 , 49 , provides the means to scale up the number and types of species that can be examined while also allowing fine spatial grain, facilitating the detection of local-scale impacts of EWEs across broad geographic extents. Rather than further scoring plant phenology ourselves, we opted to only use records that had existing plant flowering observations. For plants, we kept 2,539,475 research-grade observations that were annotated as ‘flowering’ or ‘flower budding’ or ‘flowering|flower budding’. To verify that plant flowering annotations are accurate, we hand-scored a random subset of these (6,000 records) and found that iNaturalist annotations are accurate (>96%, unpublished data), with more omission errors than commission. Since we here use presence-only phenology estimation methods, the low commission rate gave us confidence in using these annotations directly. We further added the 205,993 manually scored flowering records from 52 species generated by Li et al. 19 to the plant dataset. The top ten families included in this Article were Asteraceae, Liliaceae, Fabaceae, Ranunculaceae, Asparagaceae, Plantaginaceae, Apocynaceae, Boraginaceae, Ericaceae and Rosaceae. For insects, we focused on adult Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) from the following eight families: Papilionidae, Nymphalidae, Pieridae, Lycaenidae, Hesperiidae, Riodinidae, Saturniidae and Sphingidae. These well-sampled groups are also well known, making them particularly useful for this effort. For both plants and Lepidoptera, we further removed records whose coordinates had uncertainty >30 km. Species with <100 total observations were also removed. Since our insect phenophase of interest was the adult flight period, we removed species from the Lepidoptera dataset that have showy and common larval forms (for example, Monarch butterflies), and filtered all records labelled as caterpillars, eggs or pupae. We have estimated an error rate <0.25% for larval forms included mistakenly in the remaining dataset. In addition, we have removed migratory species as local climate influence on their phenology may be minimal. In the final raw dataset, we have 1,104,939 flowering records from 1,867 plant species and 1,639,773 Lepidoptera records from 519 species. Phenometric estimates To estimate the onset (that is, beginning), offset (that is, ending) and duration of plant flowering and Lepidoptera flight phenology in different locations, we first divided the contiguous United States into 25 × 25 km 2 equal area grid cells (Fig. 1 ). This spatial resolution provided a balance between data availability of phenological records and capturing local to regional scale phenology and weather phenomena. For the observations of each species within each grid cell, we then conducted extensive quality control following the same workflow and best practices described in refs. 19 , 50 . In particular, we accounted for sampling biases unique to iNaturalist data resulting from an annual spring City Nature Challenge programme. During this time period the number of observations in some grid cells are significantly higher than normal, which can cause biases in the estimations of phenometrics. To mitigate this bias, for each species–year–grid cell combination, we randomly thinned days with greater than average number of observations per day to their corresponding daily average number of observations 19 . For each species–year–grid cell combination, we also removed observations whose dates were beyond 3.5 s.d. (that is, extremely early or late) of all records within that combination. We only kept species–year–grid cell combinations with at least five observations from three unique days after the initial quality control. We also removed plant species with flowering time across calendar years because of challenges to estimating their phenometrics despite availability of statistical methods that can be used for such species (for example, circular analysis) 51 , 52 , 53 . Similarly, we have removed year-round flight Lepidoptera species. Species with less than five year–grid cell combinations were also excluded. Given an aim is to compare phenological responses of flowering plants and Lepidoptera to EWEs, we only kept grid cells that have at least one species from both taxonomic groups. After these filtering steps, 208,787 flowering records from 1,068 plant species and 764,280 records from 462 Lepidoptera species remained to be used for phenometric estimates. For the remaining species–year–grid cell combinations, we estimated the onset and offset of plant flowering and Lepidoptera flight phenology (as day of year) using the R package phenesse v.0.1.2 (ref. 54 ), which provides relatively robust estimates of phenometrics even with low sampling intensity. We used quantile estimates of 5 and 95 percentiles as proxies for the onset and offset of phenometrics 19 , 54 . Durations were calculated as the number of days between the estimated onset and offset dates. For each species, we conducted quality control by removing potential outliers whose pheno-estimates were >3.5 times away from the median estimates of the phenometrics compared with the median absolute deviation. We further removed species–year–grid cell combinations with estimated duration <5 days as such estimates were probably caused by the lack of data. Filtered cases were rare, for example, <1% of all species–year–cell combinations. The final dataset included 7,565 and 9,444 unique species–year–grid cell combinations with estimated onset, offset and duration for plant flowering (581 species from 766 grid cells) and Lepidoptera flight phenology (172 species from 766 grid cells), respectively. The number of distinct observation days for each estimate was kept to be included in the downstream statistical models to account for sampling effort 50 . Our phenology estimates span 7 years (2016 to 2022). Climate and weather data We obtained daily weather and annual climate data from Daymet 55 , 56 , with coverage across North America from 1980 to present at 1 × 1 km 2 spatial resolution. Annual climate summaries were used to obtain overall climatic conditions, while daily weather data were used to determine whether a specific range of dates had extreme temperature or precipitation weather events (Extended Data Fig. 6 ). Temperature seasonality was calculated as the standard deviation of monthly average temperature times 100. Precipitation seasonality was calculated as the coefficient of variation of monthly total precipitation. For each year–grid cell combination, we extracted the annual average temperature, total precipitation and their seasonalities for that year, as well as those from the previous 4 years. We then calculated the average values of each climatic variable across these 5 years and used this value as the annual average climatic conditions for that year–grid cell combination to account for potential lagged effects of climate on phenology. For daily weather data, we focused on temperature and precipitation. To determine if an individual day had extreme weather, we used a 7 day window approach centred on that day (for example, 3 days before and 3 days after) to reduce the potential effects of stochasticity of daily weather. Specifically, we compared the daily maximum and minimum temperature and total precipitation of the 7 day window with values for the same 7 day window centred on the same calendar day from 1980 to 2022. We considered extremely warm or cold days as the days when the maximum or minimum temperature of its corresponding 7 day window was above or below 2 s.d. of the maximum or minimum temperatures for the base periods, respectively. To determine whether a day was extremely dry or wet, we calculated the modified rainfall anomaly index (mRAI) 57 because a standard deviation approach was not appropriate given asymmetrical distribution of daily precipitation (for example, values <2 s.d. from the mean would produce negative values). We calculated the mRAI for individual days using the corresponding 7 day window using the following equation: $${\rm{mRAI}}_{i}=\pm {\rm{SF}}\times \frac{{P}_{i}-{\bar{P}}}{{\bar{E}}-{\bar{P}}}$$ where P i is the total precipitation of the 7 day window centred on the target day, \({\bar{P}}\) is the median total precipitation of the 7 day window centred on the same calendar day from 1980 to 2022, \({\bar{E}}\) is the mean of the 10% most extreme precipitation sums for the base periods (10% percentile for extreme dry and 90% percentile for extreme wet) and ±SF is the scaling factor with a value of 2 if P i ≥ \({\bar{P}}\) and a value of −2 if P i ≤ \({\bar{P}}\) . If mRAI i is <−2 or >2, we consider that day as extremely dry or wet, respectively. For the onset of plant flowering and flight phenology of Lepidoptera, we calculated the number of days with extreme weather (hot, cold, dry and wet) 60 days before the day of onset 25 . For offset, we calculated the number of days with extreme weather between the period from the estimated onset date to the estimated offset date. For duration, we summed the total number of extreme days for onset and offset. Because species with longer durations could have more extreme weather days by chance, we converted the number of extreme weather days to proportions by dividing the number of extreme days by the total number of days considered (for example, 60 days + total duration). Proportional data were then logit-transformed before model fitting 58 . Our overall goal was to investigate whether and how extreme weather events affect the phenology of plants and insects after considering annual average and seasonal climatic variables, which serve as a means to establish a general climate context (overall warm/cool and wet/dry). Given this goal, we did not investigate all potential phenological drivers, such as human population density 59 , day length 60 or seasonal growing degree days 61 . Others 25 showed that seasonal growing degree day and extreme events are only very weakly correlated. Statistical analysis To investigate whether EWEs affect the timing of both plant flowering and Lepidoptera flight periods even after considering the effects of average and seasonal temperature and precipitation, we fit two nested LMMs for onset, offset and duration separately using the R packages lme4 (v.1.1-31) 62 and lmerTest (v.3.1-3) 63 . We specified the nested LMM models with this general form of y ~ x 1 * taxon + … + x 4 * taxon + (1 | species) + (1 | id_cells) + (1 | year) + (0 + x 1 | species) + … + (0 + x 4 | species). The nested LMM model included the estimated phenometric values (for example, estimated onset day of year, offset day of year or log-transformed number of days for durations) as the response variable ( y ) with annual average temperature ( x 1), annual total precipitation ( x 2), temperature seasonality ( x 3) and precipitation seasonality ( x 4) all interacting with taxon (plants or Lepidoptera) as fixed effects; random effects included species names (species), grid cell identities (id_cells) and year for intercepts and the environmental variables used for fixed terms for slopes of species. The second LMM model had the same design as the nested model plus the four EWEs (as logit-transformed proportion of days) and interactions between the four EWEs and taxon as additional fixed effects. Both LMMs were fitted with maximum likelihood instead of restricted maximum likelihood to allow meaningful model comparisons. All predictors were scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 before model fitting (here and below) to ensure comparable effect sizes across covariates. We then compared models with and without EWEs via a likelihood ratio test. We used AIC and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) scores to determine whether EWEs also played important roles in affecting plant flowering and Lepidoptera flight phenology after accounting for average or seasonal climate. The interactions between EWEs and taxon informed whether the effects of EWEs on phenology were different between plants and insects. To investigate whether EWEs interact with average climate variables to affect phenology and whether such interactions are consistent across taxonomic groups, we fitted LMMs with three-way interactions between EWEs, average climatic variables and taxon (that is, x * EWEs * taxon in the R formula) in addition to the terms included in the models described above. Significant three-way interactions would suggest that plants and Lepidoptera have different interactions between extreme weather and average climatic variables. Rather than investigating all possible combinations between EWEs and average climatic variables, we built the full model to include only interactions that we believed to be potentially important and ecologically meaningful. Specifically, these included three groups of interactions. First, we added interactions between extreme warm or cold and annual average temperature to investigate whether the effects of extreme warm or cold on phenology varies across regions with different annual average temperature. Second, we added interactions between extreme wet or dry and annual total precipitation to investigate whether the effects of extreme wet or dry on phenology varies across regions with different annual precipitation. Third, we added interactions between extreme warm and extreme wet or dry, given that such interactions are becoming more frequent and are likely to impact the phenology of both plants and Lepidoptera. Starting with the full model described here, we then conducted stepwise model selections for onset, offset and duration to derive a final model for each phenophase using the step function provided by the R package lmerTest 63 . For each final model, environmental variables (both average climatic variables and EWEs) that were retained were also included as random slope terms for species so that the estimated coefficients of fixed terms were the conditional average responses of phenology to each environmental variable across all species. All models described above included the number of distinct observation days as a fixed term to account for impacts of sampling effort on the estimated phenometrics suggested by Belitz et al. 50 . We tested multicollinearity among covariates for all models by calculating variance-inflation factors (VIF) using the vif function provided by the R package car (v.3.1-2) 64 . Terms in the final models with data from both plants and insects all have VIF values <5, indicating that multicollinearity among predictors was not a problem here. For the final models, we also checked for potential spatial autocorrelation in the residuals and did not find strong evidence that it was present (Supplementary Fig. 3 ). Given the large number of species and grid cells, we were not able to fit phylogenetic generalized linear mixed models (PGLMMs) to account for possible phylogenetic autocorrelation 65 in the final models, as such models were computationally demanding 66 . Instead of running PGLMMs with both plant and insect data together, we used a subset approach and ran PGLMMs 66 on the onset, offset and duration of flowering plant and Lepidoptera separately and were able to obtain results for offset and duration of insect flight as well as the duration of plant flowering. Other models were not able to finish on a server with 64 CPU cores and 128 gigabyte memory after 2 days, after which they were automatically terminated. The results from these three models suggested that PGLMM gave qualitatively similar results with the LMMs (Supplementary Tables 3 , 4 and 5 ), providing confidence that our results presented here were robust. Flowering plant phylogeny was derived using the R package rtrees (v.1.0.3) 67 ; insect phylogeny was derived using similar methods described in ref. 68 . All analyses were conducted with R v.4.3.1 (ref. 69 ). The models described above used phenological records of plant and insect species from different seasons. These models are appropriate to look for general patterns across space and species. However, it is possible that the conclusions based on the models with all species may not apply to early or late species as they can have different responses to EWEs. In addition, species included in the above models were largely determined by their data availability; not all species have known pollination relationships with Lepidoptera. To ensure the robustness of the above models, we have conducted two additional sets of analyses. First, we classified species into ‘early’ and ‘late’ categories and refitted the final models above using only ‘early’ species for onset and using only ‘late’ species for offset. We determined a species to be ‘early’ if its median estimated onset date was before the end of April; we determined a species to be ‘late’ if its median estimated offset date was after the end of August; the remaining species are ‘middle’ species. We did not compare all phenophases of early/late plants and insects because the impacts of the offset of early plants on insects may be complemented by ‘middle’ plants and vice versa. Similarly, the impacts of the onset of late plants on insects may be complemented by ‘middle’ plants and vice versa. The results based on ‘early’ species (271 plant species and 39 insect species) for onset and the results based on ‘late’ species (99 plant species and 52 insect species) for offset are all qualitatively similar to the models with all species together (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2 ). Second, we compiled a list of plant species/genera that are known to be pollinated by Lepidoptera by conducting an extensive literature search. We then only used this subset of 317 plant species and 159 Lepidoptera species after removing Lepidoptera that have reduced or non-functional adult mouth parts to refit the final models above. Note that the plant species not included in the list can also be pollinated by Lepidoptera; we just could not find existing evidence in the literature. These models with a subset of plant species that are known to be pollinated by Lepidoptera also provided qualitatively similar results with models using all species (Extended Data Figs. 3 – 5 ). These additional analyses suggested that our models with all species together were robust. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.