Main To ensure that the 1.5 °C target of the Paris Agreement is met, effective climate policies must be implemented at the national level 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 . As the largest CO 2 emitter and the second-largest economy in the world, China has achieved its goal of a 45% reduction in carbon intensity relative to 2005 levels in 2020 4 . Demonstrating increased ambition, China announced the following dual carbon targets in December 2020: peaking CO 2 emissions before 2030 and reaching carbon neutrality by 2060. Various studies have proposed a range of mitigation policies to address this challenge; these include support for non-fossil energy deployment, the electrification of end-use sectors, energy efficiency improvement, negative emission technologies and market-based measures (such as carbon pricing), as well as other industry-specific policies 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 . To meet its dual carbon targets, China needs to implement these policies in tandem 8 . On the basis of the portfolios of mitigation policies, China is projected to successfully achieve its dual carbon targets, with cumulative gross domestic product (GDP) losses of ~1.7–5.7% (refs. 9 , 10 , 11 ). However, simply aggregating the (seemingly ideal) effects of multiple policies does not accurately reflect the actual policy outcome, as the trade-offs and synergies between policies can weaken or strengthen their effects 12 , 13 . Combining and sequencing policy implementation can largely impact the efficiency, stringency and externality of mitigation policies 14 , 15 , 16 . Nevertheless, most studies on achieving China’s dual carbon targets have focused on the effectiveness and economic costs of mitigation policies 17 , 18 , 19 , while the interactions between mitigation policies and their impacts on attaining China’s carbon neutrality have been overlooked. Recent studies have measured the trade-off and synergetic effects through comparisons of the results of the simultaneous implementation of multiple policies with the aggregation of single-implemented policies 12 , 20 . Nevertheless, these studies focused mostly on the interactions between mitigation policies in certain industries, including transport, construction and agriculture 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 . Since sectors are interlinked through the supply chain, the interactions between mitigation policies in one sector may influence the effects of mitigation policies in other sectors, which has been overlooked in the literature. Moreover, the impact of policy interactions on the timeframe of achieving the carbon neutrality target needs to be further explored 25 . Thus, this study aims to address the current insufficient understanding of the interactions between mitigation policies in achieving China’s carbon neutrality target by developing a dynamic computable general equilibrium model of China (CEEGE model), which follows the framework of the CHINAGEM model provided by the Centre of Policy Studies at Victoria University 26 , 27 , which is based on China’s input‒output table in 2017 with detailed energy sectors. To achieve this goal, we establish a comprehensive policy portfolio area towards 2060 that consists of 1,295 scenarios based on four different types of aggregated mitigation strategies (carbon pricing (C), energy efficiency (A), renewable energy (R) and electrification of end uses (E)). Various grades of policy intensity and portfolios are specified to reduce the uncertainty of future mitigation policies. For each policy portfolio, we examine the trade-offs and synergies between mitigation policies on mitigation effects, the economic costs of mitigation and efficiency (GDP loss per unit carbon reduction) by comparing the results with or without the policy interaction assumption. Our results indicate that the interactions between mitigation policies make attaining China’s carbon neutrality more challenging than expected, if this expectation refers to a simple aggregation of the direct effects of each mitigation policy implemented separately 12 , 20 . The percentage of scenarios achieving carbon neutrality by 2060 decreases substantially by 84%, and the attainment of carbon neutrality under these scenarios is postponed by 5–6 years when the interactions between mitigation policies are considered. While synergetic effects expand the potential space of policies with complementary mechanisms, trade-off effects compress the space of policies with competing mechanisms. Among the analysed policies, only combinations of renewable energy and electrification of end uses are complementary and show no competing mechanisms compressing the space of policies. In contrast, combinations of carbon pricing and renewable energy have the greatest trade-off effect. Thus, the findings highlight the need for careful policy combination to minimize carbon emissions and economic losses. Successful cases with and without policy interactions To examine the effects of policy interactions, we compare the simulation results of mitigation scenarios under two assumptions: an actual simultaneous-implementation assumption (ASIA), in which the simulation results are obtained by implementing mitigation policies simultaneously, and an idealized simple-superposition assumption (ISSA), in which the simulation results are obtained by aggregating the results of separately implemented mitigation policies (Supplementary Section 4.4 ). The baseline scenario consists of China’s nationally determined contribution target submitted in 2015, with the goals of peaking carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and reducing carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP by 60% from 2005 levels. The energy and emission development assumptions are designed with reference to the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC; 2022) 28 and the International Energy Agency (IEA; 2022) 29 STEP (stated policies scenario) scenarios. The economic and social development assumptions mainly refer to the NBSC (2022) 30 and the United Nations (2022) 31 . A detailed description of the scenario design (including macroeconomics, society, energy, emissions, carbon sequestration and mitigation strategies) for China from 2020 to 2060 can be found in Methods and Supplementary Section 3 . Specifically, the results from our simulation indicate that achieving carbon neutrality in China would be an even greater challenge under ASIA than what is perceived under ISSA (Fig. 1 ). While carbon neutrality could be achieved in 23.5% of the scenarios under ISSA, it could be achieved in only 3.7% of the scenarios under ASIA. This suggests that because of policy interactions, the percentage of scenarios in which the carbon neutrality target could be achieved by 2060 decreases substantially by 84%. Furthermore, the timeline of achieving carbon neutrality under ASIA is expected to be delayed by ~5–6 years compared with that under ISSA. For scenarios in which the carbon neutrality target is successfully achieved, the average year achieving carbon neutrality is 2054 under ISSA but 2059 under ASIA. These findings highlight the need for China to carefully consider and optimize its mitigation strategies, as previous research has suggested 3 , 32 , particularly in terms of the potential mitigation effects when multiple policies are implemented in combination. Fig. 1: Emission pathways in China from 2020 to 2060. a , CO 2 emission under ASIA and ISSA (GtCO 2 ). The divergent colour from light to dark reflects the increasing number of policies combined. The black line represents emissions under the baseline scenario. The white dot represents residual CO 2 emissions allowed (2 GtCO 2 ) to achieve the carbon neutrality target considering the carbon sequestration capacity of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology and forest systems. The sample size is 1,295, including all policy scenarios. b , Distribution of years for the scenarios in which the carbon neutrality target is achieved. The width of the density map shows the frequency of the data distribution and the box plot shows the first quantile, mean value and third quantile of all the results. The sample size is 48, including policy scenarios achieving carbon neutrality under ASIA. Full size image Among all the scenarios, the percentages of policy combinations that lead to the achievement of the carbon neutrality target differ considerably under ASIA and ISSA (Fig. 2 ). To test the impact of each policy combination, two mitigation strategies are combined and maintained at their highest levels, which represent those prioritized, whereas the other two strategies are randomly combined with varying intensities. Under ISSA, residual CO 2 emissions in 2060 for all mitigation policy scenarios range from −0.8 to 2.8 GtCO 2 , with the proportion of mitigation policy scenarios achieving carbon neutrality ranging from 88% (A 5 R 5 C x E x and C 5 R 5 A x E x ) to 100% (A 5 E 5 C x R x and C 5 E 5 A x R x ). However, under ASIA, residual CO 2 emissions rise to 1.4–3.8 GtCO 2 , with the proportion of scenarios in which carbon neutrality is achieved being reduced to a range of 28% (C 5 A 5 R x E x ) to 72% (R 5 E 5 C x A x ). Fig. 2: China’s residual emissions and cumulative economic cost in 2060. a , Residual emissions of scenarios with two maximum policy intensities under ISSA and ASIA (GtCO 2 ). The box plot shows the first, second (the median value) and third quantiles of all the results, where the maximum and minimum values are denoted with whiskers. The divergent colour from light to dark reflects the increasing policy intensity of the scenarios. The dashed line represents the residual CO 2 emissions that reach the carbon neutrality target, which is set below 2 GtCO 2 considering the carbon sequestration capacity from CCS technology and forest systems. The column chart represents the percentage of scenarios that reach the carbon neutrality target by 2060, and the text in the bar chart represents the average year for policy combinations to achieve the target. The sample size is 150, including policy scenarios with two maximum policy intensities. For example, A 5 R 5 C x E x indicates the scenarios with the highest A and R policy levels, which represents those that are prioritized. b , Cumulative economic cost of mitigation (%) for scenarios achieving the carbon neutrality target with two maximum policy intensities. The dashed lines represent the average economic costs under ISSA and ASIA. The column chart represents the proportion of scenarios with economic costs below the value indicated by the dashed line. The box plot shows the first, second (the median value) and third quantiles of all the results, where the maximum and minimum values are denoted with whiskers. The sample size is 150, including policy scenarios with two maximum policy intensities. Full size image The ISSA results suggest that the most effective policy combinations for achieving the carbon neutrality target are dominated by the highest levels of A and E, or C and E, with an average attainment of carbon neutrality of 2053–2054 (Fig. 2a ). However, the most effective policy combination under ASIA is that of R and E, with an average timeline of reaching carbon neutrality by 2059. The electrification of end uses is a key factor for attaining carbon neutrality, as the most potent portfolios must contain E policies under both AISA and ISSA. Furthermore, in terms of the timeline for achieving carbon neutrality, all scenarios under ASIA are projected to achieve the target later than those under ISSA. The average economic costs under ISSA and ASIA differ considerably (Fig. 2b ). The results reveal that, under ISSA, the average cumulative economic cost from 2020 to 2060 is ~3.8% of GDP, which is much greater than the results (~2.9%) of the scenarios under ASIA, with the best economic performance observed in the combination of the highest level of A and R. Nevertheless, under ASIA, the best policy combination from the economic side changes to the highest level of R and E. R policy clearly plays a crucial role in determining the economic cost. Trade-offs and synergies between mitigation policies Our findings highlight the notable synergetic effect of the policy combination of renewable energy and electrification of end uses (R and E), which results in a 5–20% increase in carbon reduction and a −5% to −25% decrease in cumulative GDP cost by 2060 under ASIA compared with ISSA (Fig. 3 ). The E policy supports the substitution of electricity for fossil fuels by encouraging end-use sectors to adjust energy consumption preferences and increase electricity demand; in contrast, the R policy increases the proportion of green electricity by reducing the cost of renewable electricity generation in the overall electricity mix. On the economic cost side, the R policy promotes low-cost renewable electricity and mitigates the economic cost. Even though the E policy increases the cost of electricity production due to its expanded scale, the R policy helps mitigate the economic impact. Thus, when R and E policies are combined, the policy space of each is expanded to deliver results that are stronger than those from individual implementation, highlighting their potential mutual complementarity. Fig. 3: Carbon reduction and economic cost of policy combinations under ASIA compared with ISSA (%). The colour of the dots denotes the intensity of the first policy in the policy combinations (darker colours represent greater intensity) and the size of the dots denotes the intensity of the second policy (larger sizes represent greater intensity). The sample size is 150, including all dual-policy scenarios that implement two policies together. Full size image By contrast, the carbon pricing and renewable energy (C and R) policy combination is the only one that has trade-off effects from both mitigation and economic perspectives. The carbon reduction attains a further 4–14% drop, whereas the cumulative GDP cost increases by an extra 2–12% under ASIA compared with that under ISSA by 2060. From a mitigation standpoint, the mechanism of the C policy is to increase the cost of fossil energy to encourage the shift to renewable energy, whereas the mechanism of the R policy is to increase the share of renewable energy by reducing the cost of renewable energy. These mechanisms have high similarity and consistency, which leads to each policy having a reduced policy space when they are implemented together. The same applies to the economic side, as the benefit of the R policy on the economic cost is also inhibited by the simultaneous implementation of the C policy. In summary, when policies with competing mechanisms, such as C and R, are implemented together, trade-offs are likely to arise, as the potential policy space is compressed by the policies involved. The other policy combinations have a trade-off effect in terms of carbon mitigation but a synergetic effect on the economic cost. Compared with ISSA, C and A, A and R, C and E and A and E under ASIA decrease additional carbon reduction by an average of −12%, −9%, −4% and −5%, respectively, by 2060. The corresponding additional GDP losses are reduced by an average of −4%, −3%, −7% and −8%, respectively. The most substantial improvement in mitigation efficiency is observed in the R and E combination, followed by A and E and C and E. The largest decrease in efficiency is seen in the C and R combination, followed by C and A and A and R. The same trends are evident when more mitigation policies are combined (Supplementary Section 5 ); specifically, the simultaneous implementation of policies with R and E at high levels has notable positive impacts on all dimensions. In summary, synergetic effects occur when mitigation policies with complementary mechanisms are jointly implemented, expanding their potential policy space. Conversely, trade-off effects occur when mitigation policies with competing mechanisms are jointly implemented, compressing their policy space. Beyond mitigation efficiency, mitigation policies also affect household income, consumption and utility levels through changes in electricity prices (Supplementary Section 5 ). A comparison of the results of ISSA and ASIA reveals that the R and E scenario still has the most notable positive effect on increasing the cumulative household consumption scale and utility levels by 2060, which is the opposite for the C and R scenario. A detailed discussion of the household and sectoral results can be found in Supplementary Section 5 . Policy implications for improving mitigation efficiency The Chinese government should explore the synergetic effect of mitigation policies, which could be largely achieved by constructing large-scale renewable energy generation and gradually expanding the share of electricity in final energy consumption. The following suggestions can be used when designing the alignment of the implementation pace and intensity of policies. Accelerate the development and commercialization of energy storage technologies Energy storage addresses the intermittency of renewable energy and grid load shortages, promoting renewable energy penetration and distributed grids. Compared with the baseline scenario, energy storage can increase emission reductions at a cost to the economy (Supplementary Section 5 ). Documents from the Chinese government 33 , 34 outline goals for energy storage technology, with new energy storage technologies fully market-oriented by 2030. However, China’s financial and tax support for energy storage is still in the developmental stage and is mainly advisory, lacking comprehensive and long-term incentives, in contrast to the situation in developed countries such as the United States and Germany 35 . Additionally, the levelized cost in China among various types of storage facilities ranges from 0.12 to 0.27 US$ kWh −1 (refs. 36 , 37 ). Among them, lithium-ion batteries have relatively low costs, while hydrogen energy storage tends to be more expensive. Thus, differentiated subsidy policies should be considered on the basis of the type of technology and the application scenario of storage energy facilities. Emphasize the electrification targets for end-use sectors Although the Chinese government has issued guidelines related to end-use electrification 38 , the measures proposed at the sectoral level are mostly framework oriented and lack detailed policies for effective implementation (Supplementary Section 2 ). An overall electrification target for end-use sectors, such as transport and construction, are relatively underdeveloped 39 , 40 . Future policies should include explicit targets for end-use sectors to increase electrification. According to our results and related studies 41 , 42 , 43 , total electricity consumption needs to account for no less than 70% of end-use energy consumption to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. By sector, manufacturing sectors with a high level of electrification, such as textiles and equipment manufacturing, need to maintain an electrification rate of no less than 80% and for the construction and transport sectors, the share of electricity should exceed 70% and 50%, respectively. Specify long-term emission abatement strategies Among the 94 government documents collected 35 and reviewed in this study, 59 focus on goals for 2025, 25 focus on goals for 2030 and 18 focus on goals for 2035 (Supplementary Sections 2 and 4 ). Notably, only two documents 44 , 45 propose long-term development goals for 2060, representing 4.9% of the total policies proposed after 2020. In contrast, France, the United Kingdom and the European Union have introduced four, nine and nine policies, respectively, that target 2050, accounting for 14.3%, 18.8% and 23.1% of all policies proposed after 2020, respectively 35 . Thus, the Chinese government must enhance the planning and formulation of emission reduction policies from a long-term perspective. For example, according to the simulation results presented here, China’s emissions need to decrease by more than 25% and 55% in 2040 and 2050, respectively, compared with current emissions to ensure the achievement of the carbon neutrality target by 2060. In addition to a global perspective, carbon mitigation efforts depend not only on the policies adopted but also on the policies achieved 46 . To achieve the climate target in a just, orderly and equitable manner, rather than blindly pursuing more stringent carbon reduction policies, which could lead to escalating economic losses, developing countries should focus more on optimizing the combination and sequence of carbon reduction policies 16 , 47 . This approach not only enhances the effectiveness of carbon reduction but also minimizes the economic cost of carbon reduction efforts. Additionally, since policy interactions can have implications beyond national boundaries under the need to advance national and global climate policy 48 , policy interactions must also be considered for international cooperation among countries to reduce carbon emissions. In summary, this study assesses the effectiveness of various mitigation strategies to achieve China’s carbon neutrality target with the CEEGE model. Model robustness is tested through uncertainty analysis across five dimensions: baseline scenarios, mitigation policies, model parameters, energy storage technology and carbon sequestration capacity ( Methods and Supplementary Section 6 ). Additionally, two points can be further explored. First, this study focuses on mature and foreseeable renewable energy and storage technologies, excluding emerging technologies such as green hydrogen, because of the uncertain changing trend in production costs 49 , 50 and data limitations for modelling. Second, although 1,295 scenarios with varying policy intensities are created here, policy combinations in grades of policy intensities at different timelines have not been considered, which could be an important direction for future research to analyse policy sequencing. Methods We use a dynamic computable equilibrium model of China (CEEGE model) and establish a policy range containing 1,295 scenarios that cover four mitigation strategies with five intensity grades and their portfolios. It can depict the cost-neutrality mechanisms of mitigation policies, capture dynamic sectoral changes through the upstream–downstream industrial chain and adjust both quantity and price at equilibrium simultaneously. Three indicators are used to measure the trade-offs and synergies between policy couples in terms of their carbon-mitigating effects, economic costs of mitigation and carbon-mitigating efficiency. The research framework is presented in Supplementary Section 1 . CEEGE model The CEEGE model is a dynamic computable equilibrium model of China, following the framework of the CHINAGEM model provided by the Centre of Policy Studies at Victoria University 26 , 27 . The CEEGE model is based on the neoclassical economics theory and assumes that the market is fully competitive and that the returns to scale of production are constant. It contains six economic agents (production, investment, consumption, government, foreign and inventory) and three primary factors (labour, capital and land) and is solved with the GEMPACK software 51 . In this model, a system of linearized equations is established to describe the behaviours of agents in response to price changes and determines the equilibrium price and quantity by equating the demand and supply for all goods and factors. The model can be used to capture the direct and indirect effects of exogenous changes in the economy and assess the impact mechanism across the economy. Hence, it provides a valuable tool for various policy-oriented studies related to carbon mitigation 52 , 53 . The modules of production, household consumption, governmental consumption, investment, export demand, carbon accounting and pricing, the dynamic module, the equilibrium mechanism, macro-economic closure and energy storage are presented in Supplementary Section 4 . Scenario design We establish a baseline scenario for the 2017–2060 period and 1,295 mitigation policy scenarios considering different intensities and portfolios of four major mitigation strategies (Supplementary Section 3 ). The baseline scenario reflects future economic growth, energy consumption and carbon emissions under the current mitigation policies. The historical economic growth and energy consumption data for 2017–2021 are calibrated according to the NBSC 28 , 30 and British Petroleum Statistical Review 54 . For 2022 to 2060, the projections of GDP growth, population, labour and industrial structure refer mainly to existing studies 31 , 55 , 56 . The energy consumption towards 2050 is calibrated by endogenizing energy efficiency improvement rates according to the projection of the IEA 29 and extrapolated to the year 2060. In 2060, the annual GDP and population growth rate will decline to 2.5% and −0.6%, respectively; energy consumption will increase to 6,054 Mtce and carbon emissions will decrease to 7.9 GtCO 2 . To establish mitigation policy scenarios, we extensively review the existing mitigation policies (Supplementary Section 2 ) and summarize the four most important mitigation strategies, including energy efficiency improvement, renewable energy development, electrification of end uses and carbon pricing. Energy efficiency policy (A) increases the energy efficiency improvement rate of industries and residents; the economic cost of energy efficiency policy is burdened by industries and residents according to their consumption of energy products. Renewable energy policy (R) refers to the decrease in generation and accommodation costs of solar power, onshore wind power, offshore wind power and bioenergy power due to technological progress; the development of renewable energy sectors will crowd out investment in fossil energy sectors, so the declining economic costs in the renewable energy sector will be accompanied by rising costs in the fossil energy sector. The electrification of end-uses policy (E) prompts industries and residents to replace fossil fuels with electricity in their terminal energy consumption while keeping total terminal energy consumption unchanged. The carbon pricing policy (C) is modelled as a tax on carbon emissions emitted by industries and residents and the carbon tax revenue is recycled to residents via lump-sum transfer. Then, on the basis of a systematic literature review of the above-mentioned policies, we specify five grades for the intensity of each policy (Supplementary Section 3 ). The first and fifth grades correspond to the lowest and highest intensities of each policy. Given five grades for the four mitigation strategies, 20 single-policy scenarios are obtained. Combining these mitigation policies with different grades, we obtain 150 dual-policy scenarios which implement two policies together, 500 triple-policy scenarios and 625 quad-policy scenarios. Finally, 1,295 mitigation policy scenarios are established to provide a relatively more comprehensive consideration of the uncertainty in the intensities and portfolios of future mitigation policies. Uncertainty discussions This paper discusses the uncertainty of the simulation results from five aspects: the baseline scenario, mitigation policies, model parameters, energy storage technology and carbon sequestration capacity. First, China’s carbon dioxide emission pathway may present varying predictions under the baseline scenario (Supplementary Section 3 ) and the strictness of achieving the mitigation target directly impacts emission reduction and economic costs. Thus, we set two scenarios for accelerating and delaying the emission reduction progress in the baseline to test this uncertainty. Second, different intensities of mitigation policies may lead to a nonlinear changing trend or turning point for reduced emissions and economic losses. To test this uncertainty, we created 1,295 scenarios by combining different policies with different intensities on the basis of an extensive literature review (Supplementary Section 3.2 ). We also developed two additional policies with more stringent intensity (grade 6) and weaker intensity (grade 0). Third, the simulation results for achieving the carbon neutrality target may be affected by the substitution elasticity between different energy products in the model. To address this uncertainty, the substitution elasticity between energy products was increased or reduced by 25% to test the robustness of the results. Fourth, energy storage technology can additionally support the growth of high proportions of renewable energy and increase the economic cost. In this paper, we set two scenarios with high-cost and low-cost storage energy development to test the robustness of the simulation results. Finally, enhancing the carbon sequestration capacity is crucial for achieving carbon neutrality goals, as the percentage of scenarios in which the carbon neutrality target is achieved by 2060 will decrease substantially from 11.1% to 0.23%, with a decrease in the carbon sequestration capacity from 2.5 GtCO 2 to 1.5 GtCO 2 (Supplementary Fig. 22 ). In this study, we assumed that the capacity is limited to a maximum of 2 GtCO 2 from CCS technology and forest systems by 2060. On the basis of the five categories of uncertainty analysis above, we find that the trade-offs and synergies between mitigation policy pairs remain robust: the simultaneous implementation of policies with R and E at high levels has notable positive impacts on all dimensions, and the policy combination with C and R has notable negative impacts on all dimensions. See Supplementary Section 6 for details about the uncertainty analysis. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.