Main Near-term climate stabilization requires net-zero long-lived GHGs (LLGHGs) and decreasing emissions of short-lived GHGs, such as methane 1 . However, hard-to-abate (H2A) economic activities exist that are difficult to avoid and/or expensive to decarbonize, including steel, chemicals, cement, aviation and heavy-duty vehicles 2 . These sectors currently depend on fossil fuels with limited commercially available and affordable alternatives. If these activities remain societally necessary and H2A, their continued associated emissions must be reckoned with. Some emissions of non-CO 2 LLGHGs also present large mitigation challenges. In particular, the LLGHG nitrous oxide (N 2 O) is difficult to greatly reduce while providing adequate food for the growing population of the world as it largely comes from use of agricultural fertilizers 3 . Hence, there is clear evidence that there will be a need for carbon dioxide removal (CDR) to compensate for residual CO 2 and N 2 O emissions to achieve net-zero CO 2 e LLGHG emissions 4 . Scenarios that keep warming to 1.5 or 2 °C achieve net-zero CO 2 around 2050–2060 and 2070–2080, respectively 2 . Least-cost approaches to meet these targets both reduce emissions greatly and rely on CDR to compensate for H2A emissions. Furthermore, the current pace of emission reductions is far too slow to keep below warming levels that the world has agreed to 5 , 6 , so the lack of progress to date makes exceeding 1.5 °C likely, requiring additional CDR to return temperatures to a lower value after net zero is reached by achieving net-negative emissions 7 . Currently, CDR is almost exclusively from land-based methods, such as forestry and soil carbon management 4 , 8 . Additional strategies, such as direct air capture and enhanced weathering, have not yet reached deployment at scale. In models, CDR is projected to come primarily from afforestation and biofuel energy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) over the rest of the century. Both these methods have substantial land requirements and therefore finite annual potentials, regardless of their assumed costs. CDR is already important in the real-world economy, where it is one of the strategies to achieve compliance with mandatory emissions caps or to meet voluntary targets, although more broadly carbon offset credits (that is, credits that entities purchase for them to be able to continue to emit CO 2 ) include both carbon removal (taking carbon out of the atmosphere) and carbon reduction (avoiding emissions). Credits from carbon reduction through avoided emissions is an approach rife with potential loopholes, such as lack of additionality 9 . CDR could provide benefits by allowing users to meet emission targets at lower cost, and could in principle compensate for emissions from any sector. Here, we examine the CDR requirements for meeting ambitious low-warming targets at the lowest costs while avoiding excessive risks to sustainability. We emphasize scenarios evaluated to have at least a 50% chance of keeping 2100 warming below 1.5 °C after a median overshoot of 0.1–0.3 °C in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) database, referred to as C2 scenarios 10 , although slightly cooler 1.5 °C with no or limited overshoot (C1) and slightly warmer 2 °C-consistent scenarios without overshoot scenarios (C3) are also examined ( Methods ). We first categorize CDR within those scenarios during 2050–2100 as having three distinct uses: (1) to compensate for the most difficult/expensive sectors to decarbonize, (2) to compensate for the effects of non-CO 2 LLGHG emissions and (3) to reduce cumulative emissions after overshooting the cumulative CO 2 emissions consistent with a given temperature target to achieve a gradual reversal of global warming (Fig. 1 ). We then classify a fourth usage of CDR to meet emissions caps or targets, including achieving ‘net-zero CO 2 ’, by compensating for continued CO 2 emissions from an economic activity that is relatively easier to abate (E2A), such as electricity or light-duty passenger vehicles (that is, compensating for an E2A portion of remaining emissions rather than for truly H2A residual emissions). This usage has been noted in a previous discussion 11 but has not been explored in the scientific literature, although many studies have noted the potential consequences of over-reliance on CDR 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , including legal consequences 17 . Finally, we compare CDR under least-cost scenarios with estimates of the maximum sustainable uptake via land-based CDR 15 to show that virtually any CDR use in the fourth category is likely to undermine the potential for the first three to be implemented at the required levels while keeping total CDR deployment within acceptable levels of sustainability risk (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1: Illustrative examples of the relative use of CDR under idealized pathways. All values in GtCO 2 yr −1 . Under least-cost overshoot pathways, CDR is exclusively for usages 1, 2 and 3. Amounts shown here are average year-2070 deployment of CDR in IPCC AR6 C2 scenarios (left). Illustrative examples of pathways including additional arbitrary 4 GtCO 2 yr −1 usage of CDR to compensate for emissions from E2A sectors (usage 4) show a case in which the total deployment of CDR is substantially increased (upper right) and a case in which the total CDR stays the same leading to reduced amounts available for uses 1, 2 and 3 (distributed according to their share in the left-hand scenario; lower right). Non-CO 2 LLGHGs are primarily N 2 O with a small contribution from fluorinated gases. Potential consequences of usage 4 for CDR are listed at the right, although even before the addition of usage 4 the average deployment of CDR of C2 scenarios exceeds published estimates for sustainability limits. Full size image Results The CO 2 emissions in pathways that were not arbitrarily constrained to limit net CO 2 reductions to no more than zero reach net zero by 2065 in most (78%) C2 scenarios, with all but one showing net-negative CO 2 emissions from 2070 onwards (Fig. 2 ). These types of results can easily lead to the impression that there are no actual CO 2 emissions to the atmosphere from human activities during the latter part of the century in these scenarios 18 . That is not the case, however, as emissions continue from economic activities considered H2A at that time. In fact, none of the 81 scenarios we examined reached gross-zero CO 2 emissions this century (Fig. 2 ). For example, in 2050, the average net CO 2 emission across the scenarios is only 6 Gt yr −1 but this includes 7 Gt yr −1 of CDR, implying a residual positive CO 2 emission rate of 13 Gt yr −1 . This is consistent with earlier work 7 as well as the IPCC AR6 reporting that at the point of reaching net-zero CO 2 emissions, most modelled pathways have 5–16 Gt annual CO 2 emissions 2 . Averaged over 2050–2100, net CO 2 emissions are negative with a rate of −3 Gt yr −1 while CDR increases to 13 Gt yr −1 (12 Gt yr −1 of which is land-based), implying average residual positive emissions of 10 Gt yr −1 . Hence, although CDR increases markedly over time in the scenarios, residual positive CO 2 emissions decline only modestly from the time of approximate net zero in 2050–2070 throughout the remainder of the century. For individual scenarios, most show steady, modest reductions in residual CO 2 emissions over the 2050–2100 period, but eight show increases over 2070–2100 (Fig. 2 ). This suggests that there is a high likelihood of continued substantial residual CO 2 emissions through at least the end of the century. Particularly towards the end of the century, not all residual CO 2 emissions are necessarily H2A, as they can result from modelled strong CDR cost reductions 7 . Fig. 2: Net CO 2 emissions, residual CO 2 emissions and residual CO 2 + N 2 O in pathways returning warming to 1.5 °C after an overshoot. All emissions are in GtCO 2 or GtCO 2 e yr −1 and show annual averages (left; individual scenarios in various shades of grey) and 2050–2100 averages (right) in 81 least-cost scenarios evaluated to have at least a 50% chance of returning warming below 1.5 °C in 2100 after overshoot of 0.1–0.3 °C (IPCC AR6 C2 category of scenarios). Full size image The scenarios cover a wide range (Fig. 2 ), with a standard deviation across the 81 scenarios of 3–4 Gt yr −1 both in 2050 and for the 2050–2100 average value of residual CO 2 emissions. N 2 O emissions are an additional 2 ± 1 GtCO 2 e yr −1 (over both time intervals) and F-gases provide another modest contribution of 0.5 (range 0.1–1.2) GtCO 2 e yr −1 by 2050. Together these lead to a least-cost total compensation deployed to achieve net-zero LLGHG emissions of 16 Gt yr −1 in 2050 and 12 Gt yr −1 for the 2050–2100 average in the C2 scenarios, with standard deviations (used here and hereafter) of 3–4 Gt yr −1 . The C3 scenarios use less CDR averaged over 2050–2100 (10 rather than 13 GtCO 2 yr −1 ), consistent with their decreased stringency and later achievement of net zero. Residual LLGHG emissions in C3 scenarios are similar, however, at 13 ± 3 GtCO 2 e yr −1 averaged over 2050–2100, highlighting that the differential effort between scenarios limiting warming 1.5 or 2 °C is often mainly covered through CDR 19 . C1 scenarios also have similar residual CO 2 + N 2 O + F-gas emissions of 10 ± 3 GtCO 2 e yr −1 , although achievement of such scenarios seems implausible given current trends 20 . The full range of residual CO 2 + N 2 O in C2 scenarios extends from 7 to 19 GtCO 2 e yr −1 , although most scenarios have between 9 and 13 GtCO 2 e yr −1 (Fig. 2 ). Scenarios with very high residual emissions tend to have very large amounts of CDR deployment. In these models, CDR is projected to be less expensive than reaching the more complete decarbonization levels of other models, leaving more residual emissions as all the models produce roughly similar net-zero or net-negative CO 2 emissions (Fig. 2 ). The residual emissions that must be compensated for to reach net-zero LLGHG emissions correspond to usages 1 and 2 in our classification. In overshoot scenarios, usage 3 is needed to compensate for an exceedance of the desired or acceptable temperature limit. Hence, in C2 scenarios, the actual CDR deployed is greater than that required to achieve net-zero LLGHG emissions (Fig. 1 ). Examining deployment reveals that CDR increases rapidly in C2 scenarios, reaching large values by 2040 in many scenarios even though it is only used to compensate for the exceedance of the 1.5 °C temperature limit from 2070 onward (Fig. 3 ). Average values across these scenarios are 13 GtCO 2 yr −1 over 2050–2100. Trends are of similar magnitude but delayed by one to two decades under most C3 scenarios despite those not having a need for usage 3, although a few show much lower deployment (Fig. 3 ). Similarly, C1 scenarios also reduce deployment of CDR to 10 GtCO 2 yr −1 over 2050–2100 versus 13 GtCO 2 yr −1 in C2 scenarios, as they do not aim to make up for exceeding the carbon budget as greatly. Fig. 3: Comparison of total CDR deployment and CDR sustainability thresholds. Total CDR deployment (in GtCO 2 yr −1 ) in scenarios with at least a 50% chance of returning warming below 1.5 °C in 2100 after overshoot of 0.1–0.3 °C (C2) and in scenarios having a 67% probability of keeping warming below 2 °C, with no or limited overshoot (C3). Individual scenarios are in various shades of grey. The dashed line indicates the estimated land-based CDR potential with acceptable (medium) levels of risk across a range of factors 15 . Full size image The CDR required under usages 1, 2 and 3 can be compared with the maximum CDR values using land-based techniques compatible with sustainable development. A recent analysis finds that levels of just 2.8 and 5.1 Gt yr −1 for BECCS and nature-based methods, respectively (7.9 Gt yr −1 total) have acceptable (medium) levels of risk when considering factors including biodiversity, water, food production and rights of Indigenous and local peoples 15 . This total is similar to findings from an earlier estimate of 8–9 Gt yr −1 for BECCS and forestry-related methods 21 . This total sustainably achievable CDR of ~8 Gt yr −1 is only half the average values for the residual LLGHG emissions in 1.5 °C overshoot scenarios of 16 Gt yr −1 for 2050 and is also much less than the 12 Gt yr −1 averaged over 2050–2100 (Fig. 2 ). Roughly 95% of C2 scenarios use more than this estimated maximum acceptable-risk land-based CDR available over 2050–2100 (Fig. 3 ), a finding similar to other analyses that have discussed the potential over-reliance on CDR in these scenarios 15 , 22 . Even under C3 scenarios, ~75% of models exceed that value (Fig. 3 ). Note that even keeping the magnitude of CDR use to within identified sustainability limits does not guarantee that the CDR deployment comes without detrimental side-effects. Even much smaller amounts of CDR can locally have strong unsustainable side-effects if implemented without safeguards 23 . Those scenarios that include deployment of non-land-based CDR in the latter part of the century (primarily from the REMIND and POLES models) use slightly less land-based CDR, for example on average 10 GtCO 2 yr −1 in 2070 rather than 13 GtCO 2 yr −1 in the full C2 set, but still on average exceed sustainability limits. Discussion AR6 discusses three uses for CDR: (1) to lower net CO 2 emissions in the near-term, (2) to compensate for H2A emissions and (3) to achieve net-negative emissions 4 . Their second and third correspond to our first three usages, whereas their first does not distinguish between types of emissions being compensated for. We suggest that such a distinction is important even in the near-term given the limited availability of acceptable-risk land-based CDR. For instance, there is limited land available for afforestation and reforestation, and these carbon removals saturate over decades to centuries 24 , so that the more used for near-term compensating E2A emissions the less remains for later use against H2A economic activities. Furthermore, 1.5 °C overshoot scenarios often rely on sizeable amounts of CDR even early on (Fig. 3 ). More than half the sustainability limit (4 Gt yr −1 ) is used in 57 of 81 scenarios by 2050, when these scenarios are near net-zero CO 2 and electricity sector emissions are negative, with all scenarios using at least that amount from 2060 onward. This indicates a need to rapidly deploy most CDR to compensate for H2A emissions. Although solutions may be developed easing abatement from currently H2A economic activities (for example, through behavioural demand-side changes) or increasing CDR sustainability, continued high emissions will require ever larger compensation for historical overshoot after reaching net zero. This leads to substantial uncertainties in future CDR requirements in both directions. The limited availability of CDR combined with the needs for CDR to both compensate for residual CO 2 + N 2 O and to achieve net-negative emissions to make up for overshoot imply that there are important consequences of using substantial CDR to compensate for relatively E2A emissions (our fourth category) over the longer term. Previous studies have emphasized the mismatch in the scale of CDR in scenarios versus sustainability limits to CDR deployment (Fig. 3 ), concluding for example that ‘it is concerning that such a high proportion of scenario development relies on risky levels of CDR’ 15 . Our analysis indicates that this is the case in most C3 scenarios as well as the cooler C1 and C2 scenarios. However, most scenarios are not constructed to keep CDR deployment within sustainability boundaries, but instead are cost-optimizing. Hence, the scenarios are better interpreted as showing that greater reductions in residual CO 2 and N 2 O emissions are projected to be more expensive than assumed CDR deployment. Similarly, some less stringent C3 scenarios were deliberately designed to test the achievability of 1.5 or 2 °C goals with very low CDR, finding that this is possible (Fig. 3 ) but requires large lifestyle changes 25 , 26 , 27 and/or comes (by definition) at higher costs. This is particularly important as the rationale for carbon offsets is often to reduce overall costs. Hence, use of CDR to compensate for relatively easy-to-decarbonize activities (perhaps better referred to as misuse of CDR), while potentially leading to lower costs for a specific actor, is likely to lead to one or more negative consequences (Fig. 1 ), including increased system-wide spending. For example, if there are no longer offsets available for aviation-related CO 2 emissions, use of very expensive synthetic fuels might be required for net-zero air travel. Given these economic consequences of the misuse of CDR, we examine actions in real-world carbon regulations and markets. Among jurisdictions in which GHG emissions regulations are in place, offset credits are allowed in most regions other than Europe, including California, Quebec, China, Korea, Japan and Mexico 28 . Offsets can be obtained within both compliance markets and voluntary markets. During an earlier phase 2 of the European Emissions Trading System, the EU set multiple regulations on the amount and type of offset projects that would be allowed, but not the sectoral emissions that these could be used against. In practice, data from the end of that period (2010–2012) show that >60% of the 0.9 Gt CO 2 offsets used within that compliance market went towards offsetting emissions from fuel combustion, which is primarily for power generation 29 . The EU no longer allows offsets under its (post-2020) phase 4 system for covered sectors, bringing it into alignment with long-term net-zero goals. However, the experience during phase 2 presents a cautionary tale of how offsets are likely to be deployed without explicit guards. Similarly, offsets are allowed within the regional greenhouse gas initiative in the northeast United States, a system that only covers the power sector so that those offsets are inherently in our fourth category and likely to raise costs of achieving economy-wide net-zero emissions if used over the longer term. Avoiding misuse of CDR within jurisdictions is similar to requiring that compensation be used only for emissions that are truly H2A after categorization of emissions 30 , perhaps by setting more stringent targets for E2A economic activities. Within the voluntary market, offset credits, other than for air travel, are also largely misaligned with least-cost long-term net-zero goals as they are typically purchased by wealthy corporations or organizations to compensate for continued emissions from sectors that could be decarbonized more readily, such as energy or passenger vehicles. The top US purchasers are energy corporations, finance corporations, insurance and consumer goods, with the top buyers being the Walt Disney Company, Microsoft, Salesforce, Goldman Sachs and Nike, according to the carbon disclosure project 31 , none of which are businesses primarily engaged in H2A activities. Within those voluntary purchases, offsets via forestry projects are the largest CDR contributors. Initiatives such as the Oxford principles for net zero aligned carbon offsetting 32 call for emphasizing removal rather than indirect reduction projects, and reducing one’s own emissions before offsetting, but, like the AR6, do not explicitly address the use of offsets against emissions from H2A economic activities versus those that are relatively E2A. Some companies are making efforts to improve their use of offsets; for example, Microsoft decided in 2020 to purchase only carbon removal credits and not offsets that indirectly reduce emissions (for example, funding renewable energy). This aligns better with net zero since, although paying for avoided emissions elsewhere can represent a cost-effective way to reduce emissions in the short-term, eventually the continuing emissions will have to be eliminated or compensated for with CDR to reach net zero. The use of CDR to compensate for emissions from relatively E2A activities may be cost-effective in the short term and may be valuable to helping achieve overall reductions during this decade, but it is likewise incompatible with the least-cost long-term net-zero pathways. AR6 highlights how CDR methods other than land-based ones typically have very large uncertainties in their mitigation potentials and costs and/or are at low levels of technological readiness 4 . AR6 did not provide a ‘best estimate’ of the total mitigation potential. Although it found that some individual methods might potentially provide large amounts of CDR, it also noted the risks associated with large-scale deployment of the various methods, especially large usages of land and water that potentially conflict with food production, biodiversity goals and local land rights or usage. Hence, although more CDR may be realized by 2050, there is considerable risk in depending upon such developments given the large uncertainties. While much attention has been paid to the quality of offsets based on the additionality, permanence and sustainability of CDR projects, our results suggest that consideration of which emissions are being compensated for is also critical, along with reporting and monitoring of the emissions being offset. Our analysis finds that as society transitions to net-zero LLGHG emissions, virtually all carbon removal efforts need to shift towards compensating for H2A emissions and overshoot. This would require rapidly moving away from any use of offsets to compensate for emissions from comparatively E2A activities such as power generation, energy usage of large corporations or fossil fuel-powered vehicles. Methods We examined scenarios evaluated to have at least a 50% chance of keeping 2100 warming below 1.5 °C after an overshoot of 0.1–0.3 °C in the database accompanying the IPCC AR6 (ref. 10 ), referred to as C2 scenarios 2 . We emphasize these overshoot scenarios given the small remaining cumulative CO 2 emissions to keep below 1.5 °C (ref. 33 ). Combining that small budget with the continuation of global CO 2 emissions through the present day and the current limited ambition of country pledges and targets makes such an overshoot scenario the most plausible ‘best-case’ scenario 5 , 6 . Of the 133 scenarios in this classification, 81 provide the data required for this analysis: (1) net CO 2 emissions, (2) carbon sequestration by BECCS, (3) carbon sequestration by land (for example, afforestation) and (4) N 2 O emissions. Sequestration by other methods (direct air capture, feedstocks, enhanced weathering and so on) is also included for the 32 scenarios that deploy those, although 11 of them include very modest deployment even by 2100 (<2 GtCO 2 yr −1 ). We exclude the two C1 and one C2 scenarios that forced non-land-use carbon capture and storage (CCS) to be zero as the strongly net-negative CO 2 emissions reported for those seems implausible given that constraint and incompatible with 1.5 °C (refs. 4 , 25 ). We emphasize the period 2050–2100 as most scenarios achieve net zero shortly after mid-century (42% by 2060 and 78% by 2065) and have thus achieved reductions to very low levels of residual emissions from most major sectors by that time. For example, electricity sector emissions are on average negative by 2046 across the C2 scenarios. Scenarios in the IPCC AR6 database are mostly derived from models that optimize costs, finding the least-cost pathway to achieve a given emissions mitigation or radiative forcing target based on the marginal abatement costs associated with abatement at a given time 34 . Most models include estimates of improvements in technology and decreases in costs over time. Modelled CDR deployment is generally based on the amount projected to be available at less expense than the next available abatement of residual emissions, although some scenarios do impose additional constraints such as low CCS deployment, limits to bioenergy use, specific targets for renewable energy or requiring emissions to follow country pledges. CDR is the sum of all three carbon sequestration variables (land-based CDR is the sum of BECCS and ‘land’, the last of which refers largely to afforestation and reforestation but also includes biochar and soil carbon), so that we calculate the residual positive CO 2 emissions after reaching net zero as the sum of CDR and net CO 2 emissions. For example, if net CO 2 emissions were 1 GtCO 2 yr −1 and CDR was 4 GtCO 2 yr −1 this would imply a residual positive emission rate of 5 GtCO 2 yr −1 . Some pathways assess land CDR deployment relative to a baseline and some combine gross emissions and removals in their land-use sector diagnostics, but we expect the influence of these factors to be of second order compared with the wide ranges reported across the model ensemble. To verify this assumption, we evaluated CDR using reported totals and using changes relative to 2020 values, which were substantial only for CDR via land in scenarios with the POLES model and CDR via feedstocks in scenarios with the IMAGE model. Accounting for 2020 baseline CDR reduces the reported CDR across the models only marginally. For example, the 2050–2100 average total CDR across the models in C2 scenarios is 6% lower evaluating changes relative to 2020 rather than totals. All values reported here include the removal of any 2020 baseline CDR. We assume post-2050 residual positive emissions of both CO 2 and N 2 O result from H2A economic activities rather than continuing to come from those that are relatively easier to decarbonize given that the difficulty of achieving economy-wide net-zero targets requires virtually complete elimination of emissions from all sectors for which readily available alternatives exist. For instance, analysis of CO 2 emissions from electricity generation shows that these are negative by 2046 averaged across C2 scenarios. With electricity decarbonized, most residual energy sector CO 2 emissions stem from production of hydrogen or synthetic energy carriers rather than continued unabated fossil fuel use 2 . In contrast, emissions from industrial processes and oil use, which is primarily for transportation, decline by on average just over half (52–53%) of their 2020 levels by 2050 and remain at 20–40% of 2020 levels even by 2070, reflecting the difficulty of eliminating emissions from those H2A economic activities. In effect, we assume that residual emissions are by definition H2A as otherwise the models would have eliminated those rather than abating other sources and deploying so much CDR. This is probably a valid assumption for most models over the entire century, although behavioural and demand-side changes have been underexplored in the literature 35 and for some the assumed cost of CDR may decrease so much that late in the century it may become less expensive than even some E2A emissions. Additionally, the amount of H2A emissions under a least-cost pathway will depend on discounting assumptions that influence the total cost over the time required to reach the target. As the models incorporate analyses of technical mitigation potentials, economic costs, projected technological development and estimates of plausible behavioural changes, being H2A can reflect limitations associated with any of those factors or multiple factors. While technological and sociological developments may make emissions reductions for some currently H2A economic activities easier in the future, that does not imply that compensating for what are already relatively E2A sectors is a wise use of limited CDR given that the reliance on CDR in existing scenarios already far exceeds sustainability limits. Contributions of N 2 O are added using the AR6 GWP100 value of 273 (ref. 36 ) to provide a ‘CO 2 equivalent’ value across LLGHGs. Note that these scenarios already assume substantial abatement of N 2 O, with, for example, emissions decreasing by ~20% by 2070 under C2 scenarios. This is a large reduction considering upward pressure for fertilizer use to feed a growing population, which has led to increasing growth rates in recent decades 3 . For comparison, we performed similar analyses on 198 C3 scenarios providing the requisite data and on 63 C1 scenarios.