Main Range shifts can manifest in many ways on the landscape. Changes can occur at the margins of the species climatic range, which are named after the expected direction of climate change-induced shifts—‘leading edge’ generally refers to the cooler range margin, from which species are expected to expand, whereas ‘trailing edge’ refers to the warmer range margin from which they are expected to retreat 1 . A ‘march’ occurs when both the leading and trailing edges move in the same direction—a march towards cooler areas would be expected for species that are perfectly tracking changes in climate. A climatic range ‘contraction’ occurs when the leading edge shifts towards the trailing edge and the trailing edge shifts towards the leading edge, or when one of these shifts occurs without a change in the other. Likewise, range ‘expansions’ occur when the opposite is true. A species’ climatic range may also experience a ‘lean’ where the central tendency of the distribution changes, but the positions of the leading and trailing edges are maintained. Which of these range shifts occurs, if any, depends on the species’ ability to persist within their historic climatic range and migrate to climatically new areas. Tree migration requires production and dispersal of seeds to new areas in addition to subsequent establishment, survival and growth to maturity of the resulting seedlings. Trees that lack adequate seed production, long-distance dispersal abilities, or that require seedling establishment conditions absent from the landscape, are therefore more likely to lag behind expected migrations as a result of climate change 2 , 3 , 4 . High-severity disturbances can provide a catalyst for tree species range shifts by altering site conditions and reducing biotic competition for resources 5 . Variations in disturbance type and severity create unique environments that can subsequently prevent the same species from regenerating 6 and/or allow different types of colonizing species to establish 7 . For example, high-severity fire eliminates biomass and creates openings on the forest floor, whereas insect and disease outbreaks can add organic material to the forest floor 8 , 9 . Thus, the microenvironment created by insect or disease outbreaks may favour species that are more shade tolerant and can germinate under thick litter layers, in contrast to those favoured following high-severity fire or similar disturbance 10 . Although recent work has highlighted the potential role of disturbances to catalyse range shifts of certain tree species 5 , 8 , 11 , 12 , there are limited empirical data on how multiple disturbance events have influenced the magnitude and direction of tree species range shifts following recent warming at a continental scale. The goal of this study is to quantify the effects of disturbance events on potential range shifts of 15 dominant tree species in the interior western United States using observational evidence from the national forest inventory. We construct a two-dimensional climate space using principal components analysis (PCA) and model climatic ranges of adults and seedlings based on the historic (1961–1990) climate of the forest inventory plots where adults were present from 1995 to 2018 and where seedlings were present from 2009 to 2018. We examine differences between adult and seedling climatic range centroids, margins and area of overlap. Climatic ranges of adult trees are compared with those of seedlings of the same species in forest inventory plots that have experienced the same recent disturbance to eliminate findings due to differences in disturbance occurrence across climate space. We compared results across disturbance types, with the hypothesis that differences between adult and seedling climatic ranges would be larger in areas that experienced disturbances in the past 30 years compared to those without documented recent disturbance, and that this would vary with the life-history traits of the species. Regional climate space Variation in climate across the interior western United States was well represented by the first two principal components of our PCA (Extended Data Fig. 1 ). PC1 explained 74.4% of the variance and was most correlated with climatic moisture deficit (CMD; eigenvector coefficient = −0.40) and precipitation as snow (0.39). CMD is a composite variable representing both temperature and precipitation that ranges from cold/wet climates on the lower end to hot/dry climates on the upper end. Therefore, plots that fall towards the lower end of PC1 tend to be situated in hot and dry areas, such as lower elevations and latitudes, whereas those on the high end are in cold and wet areas, such as high elevations and latitudes. We focus our analysis here on PC1 as it represents most of the variation in climate space across our plots. Evidence of climatic range shifts We found that most species had seedling climatic ranges across disturbance types that differed in some way from that of adults. Similar to another analysis of national forest inventory data for the western United States 12 , we found that most seedling climatic range centroids were located in cooler areas than those of their conspecific adults (Fig. 1 ), furthering the evidence for climate change-induced shifts in species climatic ranges. However, subsequent analyses of climatic range margins reveal that contractions away from hot climates are more common than expansions into cool climates in both disturbed and undisturbed areas (Fig. 2 ). This is probably a signal of regeneration failure at the hottest edge of species climatic ranges and a lack of migration to new, cooler and wetter climate zones. That all significantly shifting species showed PC1 lower-margin shifts in the same direction away from hot/dry climates (Fig. 2 ) provides evidence that these losses are influenced by climate. Field evidence for tree regeneration failure in hot and dry areas has been accumulating in the last several years across the western United States 13 , 14 , 15 . Fig. 1: Median distance and direction between the centroid of adult and seedling climatic ranges for each species in each disturbance type. Arrow tails represent adult centroids centred on the origin and arrowheads represent seedling centroids for each species in each disturbance type: fire ( a ), insect/disease ( b ), none ( c ). Background shading corresponds to the four quadrants of the PCA biplot that represent hot/dry, hot/wet, cold/wet and cold/dry conditions. PC1 is most correlated with CMD and PC2 is most correlated with mean summer precipitation. Full size image Fig. 2: Estimate and 95% credible interval of the difference between seedling and adult climatic range margins and centroids. The data are relativized by adult climatic range width on PC1. Estimates and CIs were calculated from the 4,000 derived posterior estimates of range margin position for each species in each disturbance type. Climatic range margins were modelled using the sample sizes in Extended Data Table 2 . Species points are ordered according to the mean PC1 value of plots with adults present, which ranges from hot/dry to cool/wet climates. Points not significantly different from zero are desaturated. A significant positive estimate indicates that the seedling distribution is colder/wetter than the conspecific adult distribution, whereas a negative estimate indicates that seedling distributions were hotter/drier. Species by disturbance combinations are shaded by shift type if applicable. Full size image Despite previous field-documented evidence for disturbance-catalysed leading-edge expansion for some of the species analysed here 8 , 16 , 17 , we found significant expansions from the leading edge to be rare (Fig. 2 ). There are several possible reasons for the lack of regeneration in cooler and wetter areas found in this dataset. It is reasonable to assume that contraction would happen faster than expansion in disturbed areas, since disturbances kill individuals quickly, while new seedling establishment and regeneration take much longer 18 . Seedlings are likely to have episodic establishment coinciding with preferred weather windows 19 , which may not yet have occurred in the survey years we analysed for seedlings (2009–2018), especially if the plot was recently disturbed. In addition, recent germinants are not reflected here as conifer seedlings are only recorded in United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) data if they are at least 15.2 cm tall 20 . Therefore, it is possible that not enough time has passed to see new tree establishment in cooler and wetter areas, especially for slow-establishing subalpine species 6 . Tree seedling recruitment is also often patchy 18 , which decreases the chance of adequately sampling regeneration. Despite these limitations, our analysis picked up a consistent pattern of a lack of seedlings in the hottest and driest portions of species climatic ranges, therefore giving us confidence that sampling was sufficient to reflect widespread patterns on the landscape, and that expansions into new climate zones are not as widespread as regeneration failures within the adult climatic range. This has been shown to be the case in other areas of the country as well 21 . Expansions may have also been rarer in this study than field studies of geographic range limits suggest because of the focus on climatic range. We defined climatic range expansions as seedling presence in a climate zone that adults have not occupied in recent history, rather than just seedling presence in a new geographic area. Therefore, seedlings that established outside their geographic range locally would not have been categorized as an expansion here, unless that geographic area was also climatically new to the species in the given disturbance category. Although climatic range expansions were characterized relative to adult climatic ranges within each disturbance category, we confirmed that the significant expansions documented here also represented a climatic expansion across the entire adult climatic range regardless of disturbance history (Extended Data Fig. 2 ). Difference between disturbance types and species We quantified the climatic area of the adult range that was outside the seedling climatic range (‘lost’) versus the climatic area occupied by the seedling climatic range that was outside the adult climatic range (‘gained’), relative to the size of the adult climatic range. We characterize these as losses versus gains because the seedling climatic range represents the current trajectory of the species 6 and thus areas in climate space that are not occupied by seedlings currently are climate zones most likely to be lost from the species’ range in the future. That most species in the analysis had similar proportions of their adult climatic range ‘lost’ in both undisturbed and disturbed areas (Fig. 3 ) indicates that regeneration failure is common regardless of disturbance impacts. However, differences between species in the relative amounts of climatic area lost and gained between disturbance types reveal different patterns of regeneration failure among species with different life-history traits. Fig. 3: The proportion of the adult climatic range area that was ‘lost’ versus ‘gained’. Points show posterior mean estimates, while error bars show 95% CIs, calculated from 4,000 posterior estimates of ellipse area for the seedling climatic range, adult climatic range and area of overlap. Climatic ranges were modelled using the sample sizes in Extended Data Table 2 . Species are ordered by their average PC1 score, from hot/dry to cold/wet. Points outlined in black indicate statistically significant estimates while points in grey were not statistically significant. An asterisk indicates that the mean proportion lost or gained for that species in that disturbance was significantly different than for the same species in the undisturbed plots. The ‘x’ symbol indicates that area lost significantly exceeded area gained for that species and disturbance combination. Full size image Three species (Engelmann spruce, lodgepole pine and Douglas fir) had greater climatic range area losses under disturbed conditions than undisturbed conditions, indicating that regeneration failure at the trailing edge was exacerbated by disturbance for these species. Fires in these ecosystems tend to be large and of high-severity 22 which can eliminate all local seed sources for new establishment, thereby increasing the time required for recovery, especially where lodgepole pine is not serotinous. Although we did not have the replication needed to assess the effects of compound disturbances, Engelmann spruce and lodgepole pine in the interior western United States have both suffered high mortality from recent beetle outbreaks, and this mortality followed by fire could further reduce available seed sources 23 . This combined with climate warming may have resulted in these species lacking regeneration in the hottest and driest portions of their ranges (Fig. 2 ). Burned areas stood out in facilitating seedling regeneration in new climate zones (that is, climatic range gains) more than other disturbance types (Fig. 3 ), in alignment with the results of ref. 12 . In addition, burned areas did not show significant differences between adult and seedling PC1 range margins for most warm-adapted species (for example, two-needle pinyon pine) while insect/disease and undisturbed areas did (Fig. 2 and Extended Data Table 1 ). This was somewhat surprising, given the abundance of studies documenting post-fire regeneration failure for warm-adapted species in the western United States 13 , 14 . This may be a result of the data being collected before recent large high-severity fires (for example, the fire season of 2020 24 ) or may be evidence that despite local regeneration failures after fire, seedlings of warm-adapted species are still regenerating in hot and dry climates in other portions of their geographic range, potentially due to small-scale microclimate buffering that cannot be detected in macroscale climate data 25 . Warm-adapted species gained similar amounts of climatic range area as they lost in burned areas, while often losing more than they gained in other disturbance categories (Fig. 3 ). Species that rely on the microenvironments produced by fire to establish may be showing climatic range stability in burned plots as a result of regeneration pulses promoted by recent fire. This is further evidenced by the dominance of climatic range contraction for these species in undisturbed plots, where the microsite conditions for germination and early survival of fire-promoted species are less common. However, it is important to note that the climatic ranges of half the species analysed here did not significantly differ after fire and that one-third of all species showed significant differences in climatic ranges even without recent disturbance (Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 3 ). Insect and disease outbreaks are distinct from fire in their influence on climatic range differences. Most species in insect/disease areas had seedling regeneration in cooler and drier climates than those of adults (Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 4 ), which is surprising given recent worsening of droughts 26 . This may be explained by drier areas having more severe adult mortality 27 , thereby increasing resources for seedling establishment. Seedlings are also likely to face less competition from understory species in drier climate zones. Conclusions The tree species of the interior western United States that have significantly different seedling climatic ranges than adults appear to be moving in the direction expected due to climate warming. However, these climatic range shifts have largely been achieved through a lack of regeneration in hot environments and occur across disturbance types. Expansion from the cool/wet climate margin was observed for a few species, but it is unknown whether these populations will persist to maturity. Otherwise, regeneration has mostly fallen within the adult climatic range. Local field studies must continue to monitor these changes. Even with a national dataset of >25,000 plots, we were still limited by sample size in this analysis, especially in areas affected by disturbance. It may be too early to detect widespread climatic range expansion, but as climate warming continues to accelerate and species are pushed to the edge of their climatic tolerances, changes can quickly become apparent. Given that disturbances in this study occurred within the last 30 years, there is still time for regeneration to make up for the losses seen here. However, targeted field studies have documented these same patterns 3 , and climate warming only continues to accelerate, while the probability of good recruitment years at the trailing edge declines 28 . Therefore, trees may be ideal candidates for assisted migration programmes that can help facilitate migration into new climate zones 29 , especially for species whose climatic ranges have already contracted substantially. Methods Forest inventory and analysis data The national forest inventory of the United States, collected by the USDA Forest Service FIA programme, collects attributes of forest characteristics across the United States each year using standard plot designs and data collection procedures 20 . Data used in this study were limited to the states of Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico (the interior western United States). Data from coastal states were excluded as several of the species in this analysis have genetically distinct varieties that inhabit coastal versus interior areas, and these varieties are expected to respond differently to climate change 30 . Plots included in the analysis were all surveyed with the national standard plot design 20 , 31 , located on public land, and had no evidence of artificial regeneration (tree planting), resulting in 25,030 plots for analysis. Plots have a 0.4 ha total footprint, divided among four circular subplots measuring 7.3 m in radius. In each plot, three subplots are located at the points of an equilateral triangle, with a subplot in the centre. Each of the outer three subplot centres is 36.6 m from the inside subplot centre. All trees on each subplot >12.7 cm in diameter are measured. All trees <12.7 cm diameter are recorded if they are inside a microplot measuring 2.1 m in radius; these were classified as adults in our analysis given the generally low productivity of forests in the interior western United States. Seedlings are defined as individuals at least 15.2 cm tall for conifers and at least 30.5 cm tall for hardwoods, with a diameter <2.5 cm. The standard FIA protocol only collects tree and seedling data in ‘forested’ plots, which must have had at least 10% tree cover now or before recent disturbance. We thus only included seedling and adult data from these ‘forested’ plots to ensure both adults and seedlings were surveyed in all plots analysed. Plots surveyed from 1995 to 2018 were used for data on adult tree presence and included any plot where an adult was present (regardless of whether a seedling was present). Plots surveyed from 2009 to 2018 were used for data on seedling presence to capture the most recent and youngest cohort of trees as an indication of future forest composition. These similarly included any plot where a seedling was present (regardless of whether an adult was present). Principal components analysis To examine variation in climate across the interior western United States, we performed a PCA with estimates for the 1961–1990 period of eight key climatic variables extracted from CMIP3 climate grids at 1 km resolution produced for the software ClimateWNA v.4.62 (ref. 32 ; https://sites.ualberta.ca/~ahamann/data/climatewna.html ). The variables used were mean temperature of the coldest month (MCMT), number of frost-free days (NFFD), climatic moisture deficit (CMD), mean summer (May–Sept) precipitation (MSP), summer heat moisture index (SHM; calculated as (mean temperature of the warmest month)/(mean summer precipitation/1,000)), winter precipitation (WPPT), precipitation as snow (PAS) and degree days <0 °C (DD0). These variables were selected to minimize the number of variables highly correlated with each other while still representing both temperature and water availability aspects of climate relevant to plant survival and growth. PCA proceeds from a correlation matrix with Pearson correlation coefficients, which relativizes all variables and assumes linear relationships between them 33 . Therefore, the variables of WPPT, MSP, PAS, DD0 and SHM were log-transformed to meet this assumption before analysis. The PCA was performed using the prcomp function in R v.4.1.3 (ref. 34 ). The biplot of PC1 and PC2 can be found in Extended Data Fig. 1 . Disturbance and species data The disturbance history of each plot was compiled using FIA tree and condition data 2 , 30 m resolution LANDFIRE vegetation disturbance data 35 and 30 m resolution monitoring trends in burn severity (MTBS) data 36 . When using the FIA tree data, we counted a plot as disturbed if the tree data indicated that it had five or more trees killed by the same disturbance. The FIA condition data records disturbances (up to six per plot) if the disturbance was at least 0.4 ha in size and damaged at least 25% of trees or area in the condition. The MTBS database included fires from 1984 to 2016 and the LANDFIRE vegetation disturbance database included all disturbances from 1999 to 2014 that were classified as medium- to high-severity. Of the FIA plot × year combinations that were categorized as ‘burned’ in our analysis, 63% were confirmed by two or more of our disturbance data sources, making the chance of including unburned refugia within a fire perimeter in the burn category relatively low. Plots were then categorized by the most recent disturbance experienced in 30 years before the most recent plot survey, which resulted in the groups: fire ( n = 3,875), insect/disease ( n = 4,409), harvest ( n = 464), wind ( n = 87), other ( n = 1,973) and undisturbed ( n = 14,222). If two or more disturbances were equally recent at a plot, the plot was assigned to the disturbance hypothesized to have the greatest ecological effects (fire > harvest > wind > insect/disease > other). In addition, all plots that burned in the past 10 years were included in the ‘fire’ category, as recent burning is likely to control regeneration at a plot, regardless of subsequent disturbances. Both live and dead standing adult trees at each plot were counted in the presence/absence data to capture the adult presence before disturbance. If a plot had no disturbance detected in the 30 years before its most recent survey, then it was categorized as ‘undisturbed’. Thirty years was chosen as a cutoff to balance the risk of slow-growing species not growing fast enough to get included in the post-disturbance seedling survey and the risk of characterizing a plot as post-disturbance when the disturbance was too long ago to have an impact on the species composition that was surveyed. Most of the conifer species in the interior western United States are extremely slow growing 6 , 37 and therefore the risk of missing recent regeneration was probably higher than missing post-disturbance regeneration that occurred 20–30 years in the past. To have a robust sample size, only fire, insect/disease and undisturbed plots were analysed in this study. Species were chosen for this analysis on the basis of their occurrence in the data; only species with seedlings (which are less common than adults) present on at least 60 plots in two out of the three disturbance types were included. This resulted in 15 species chosen for analysis, 9 of which had >60 plots in all disturbance categories (Extended Data Table 2 ). We analysed all species by disturbance combinations, except for those with exceptionally low sample sizes ( n = 9 or 10; Extended Data Table 2 ). In this study, the presence of adult trees (>2.5 cm diameter at breast height (DBH)) at a plot was considered the ‘current’ forest species composition and the seedling (< 2.5 cm DBH) species composition data were considered the ‘future’ forest composition, as seedling composition in the first few years post-disturbance has been found to be indicative of long-term establishment trends in conifer forests of the western United States 6 . Shifts in climatic range centroids Here we defined the ‘climatic range’ as the ellipse formed by the 95% prediction interval around the set of points in two-dimensional PC space for adults and seedlings of each species in each disturbance type. Climatic ranges were estimated by fitting Bayesian multivariate normal distributions to each unique species × age × disturbance combination using the function siberMVN in the package SIBER 38 , which uses the package rjags in R 39 . The model used in this function was: $${y}_{i} \sim {\rm{multivariate}}\,{\rm{normal}}({\mathbf{\upmu }},\varSigma )$$ (1) $${\mathbf{\upmu }} \sim {\rm{normal}}({{\mathbf{\upmu }}}_{0},{{\boldsymbol{\tau }}}_{0})$$ (2) $$\varSigma \sim {\rm{inverse}}\,{\rm{Wishart}}({\varSigma }_{0},d)$$ (3) where i = 1,…, n with n being the sample size for each unique species × age × disturbance combination. The PC1 and PC2 values for each unique group were first z -score transformed. Since values were z -score transformed before model fitting, their modelled mean values should be close to 0 and the modelled marginal variances should be close to 1; therefore, we assigned vague priors for the mean and variance parameters of the multivariate normal distribution 40 . The prior on µ was normal with µ 0 = (0,0) and τ 0 (precision) = (0.001,0.001). An inverse-Wishart distribution with 2 d.f. ( d ) and a 2 × 2 diagonal scale matrix ( Σ 0 ) with 1s on the diagonals was used as the prior for the covariance matrix. The models were run for 10,000 iterations with the first 1,000 discarded as burn-in. Two chains were run and the posterior distributions were thinned by 10. This resulted in 4,000 posterior estimates of µ and Σ (the covariance matrix) for the multivariate normal distribution describing each species × age × disturbance combination. All trace plots of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) output were examined to ensure that they had converged and were well-mixed after burn-in 41 . The 95% prediction ellipse (which contains 95% of the data) around the posterior estimates of each unique group was considered the climatic range of that group. Climatic ranges were inspected for each species × disturbance combination to ensure that no point clouds were artificially cutoff in climate space, which would indicate that the full climatic range was not captured (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). We calculated the distance between each posterior estimate of the seedling and adult range centroid ( µ ) for each disturbance type using the functions siberCentroids and allCentroidVectors in the R package SIBER 38 . Distance between centroids was calculated using the Pythagorean theorem—( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 —where x 2 and y 2 are the posterior estimates of µ for the seedling climatic range and x 1 and y 1 are the posterior estimates of µ for the adult climatic range. Mean and 95% credible intervals (CIs) were calculated for the posterior estimates of distance. A CI not overlapping 0 was interpreted as a significant shift in range centroid for a given species by disturbance combination. Posterior estimates for distances between centroids were also compared between species in each disturbance type and between disturbance types for each species by identifying non-overlapping CIs. The magnitude of difference in centroids between adults and seedlings only significantly differed between disturbance types for two species, where differences were greater in disturbed areas (Extended Data Fig. 5 ). The overall direction of the vector connecting adult and seedling centroids was determined by plotting all vectors in climate space, centred on the origin. Shifts in climatic range margins We investigated how the climatic range margins differed between adults and seedlings across species and disturbance types to get a full picture of how species may be experiencing climatic range shifts. To investigate shifts in the climatic range margins, the maximum and minimum values of the 95% confidence ellipse (the upper and lower margins, respectively) on both the PC1 and PC2 axis were extracted from each posterior ellipse estimate for the adult and seedling in each disturbance by species combination. The adult margin values were then subtracted from the corresponding seedling margin values for each posterior estimate in the chain to calculate the difference in PC1 and PC2 margins between adult and seedling climatic ranges. This value was then divided by the difference between the values of the adult upper and lower margins on the axis of interest to relativize by the overall width of the adult climatic range on that axis. The mean and 95% CI were calculated from these 4,000 derived posterior estimates to determine whether they were significantly different from zero (no CI overlapping zero). The potential climatic range shifts displayed on each axis were categorized for each species in each disturbance type on the basis of the significant changes to the centroid and climatic range margins. For example, a species with only a significant difference between the adult and seedling climatic centroid on one axis would be categorized as experiencing a ‘lean’ on that axis. On the other hand, a species where the only significant difference is that the seedling upper margin is significantly higher than that of the adult on one axis would be categorized as experiencing an ‘expansion’ on that axis. Centroid and margin differences on PC1 most often resulted in no climatic range shift ( n = 24), followed by climatic range contractions ( n = 12), leans ( n = 4), expansions ( n = 2) and marches ( n = 1; Extended Data Fig. 3 and Extended Data Table 1 ). We ensured that seedling expansions outside the adult climatic range in one disturbance type represented expansion outside the adult climatic range in all disturbance types by examining adult and seedling ellipses (Extended Data Fig. 2 ). Shifts on PC1 are the focus of our main text, as this was the PC that explained most (74%) of the variation in climate across the study area. The climatic range margin and centroid analysis results for PC2 are shown in Extended Data Fig. 4 . We also performed the same multivariate normal Bayesian model and centroid and range margin shift analysis described above for the climate space defined by log(DD0) on the x axis and log(WPPT) on the y axis, the two variables that were most correlated with the ordinal directions of the PCA. Evaluating shifts on a precipitation axis (WPPT) versus a temperature axis (DD0) helped clarify whether the shifts that were observed on PC1 (which varied from hot/dry to cold/wet) were due more to temperature or precipitation, or both. As Extended Data Fig. 6 shows, shifts away from the hot/dry margin of PC1 were mostly driven by shifts away from hot areas (places with fewer DD0), rather than shifts away from dry areas (although this occurred for a few species in burned areas). There is also some evidence that certain species are shifting away from wet areas after insect/disease outbreaks (Extended Data Fig. 6 ). Climatic range gains and losses For each disturbance type, we determined the area of each adult and seedling climatic range, and the amount of overlap between them using the function bayesianOverlap in the package SIBER 38 , which calculates the area within each 95% prediction ellipse and the area of overlap between seedling and adult ellipses for each disturbance type. This resulted in 4,000 estimates of each ellipse area and area of overlap, one for each of the posterior estimates. We then derived the amount of climatic range gain and loss as a proportion of the adult range size for each estimate using the formulas: $${\rm{gain}}=\frac{{A}_{\rm{s}}-{A}_{\rm{o}}}{{A}_{\rm{a}}}$$ (4) $${\rm{loss}}=\frac{{A}_{\rm{a}}-{A}_{\rm{o}}}{{A}_{\rm{a}}}$$ (5) where A s is the ellipse area of the seedling, A a is the ellipse area of the adult and A o is the area of overlap between the two. This is similar to the concepts of ‘niche unfilling’ and ‘expansion’ used by ref. 42 to describe invasive species niches but expresses gains and losses as proportions of the adult climatic range area, to scale the results across species with varying climatic range sizes. The mean value and 95% CIs for gains and losses were calculated for each species by disturbance combination. CIs that did not overlap 0 were interpreted as significant gains or losses. We also assessed whether the amount of loss and gain for each species was significantly different between undisturbed versus disturbed plots. If the CIs for the mean amount of gain or loss did not overlap between disturbance types, then they were considered significantly different. Similarly, we assessed whether the amount of loss for each species by disturbance combination was significantly different from the amount of gain by comparing 95% CIs. Significant differences in losses and gains between species in each disturbance type were assessed in the same way. The proportions of adult climatic range area ‘lost’ and ‘gained’ in the seedling climatic range did not differ significantly between disturbance types when all species were considered together (Extended Data Fig. 7 ), although there were several significant differences between species within a disturbance type (Extended Data Table 3 ). Low sample size The climatic range position results for species with low sample sizes ( n < 60) should be interpreted with caution, as there were relatively little data to construct the climatic range for these species (Extended Data Table 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Most of the species with few plots containing seedlings occurred in burned areas, which could be due to post-fire regeneration failure or slow post-fire recovery. The time between the last fire and the survey was significantly shorter in plots located in hotter and drier environments (lower PC1 scores) (linear model, t = 24.84, P < 0.001), which may explain why many of the warm-adapted species have low sample sizes in burned areas; there was just not enough time before field sampling for trees to regenerate. However, the overall mean time since fire in the plots examined was 13.9 (±9) years, which should be enough time to capture regeneration for many of the species examined 6 . Most species with low sample sizes did not have significant differences in the position of climatic range centroids nor margins, and so, if anything, we may have missed possible climatic range expansions for these species.