
Climate change and
tne energy transition

As one of the world’s largest integrated energy The challenge is to develop and deploy

and chemicals company, we have an important —_ technology solutions at speed and scale, to
role to play to support energy security and provide the benefits of oil and gas for future
promote sustainable practices in response to generations, while minimizing emissions.
climate change. It is a complex, multidimensional, and capital

We are investing in technology needed for intensive challenge that will span generations.

a stable energy transition that utilizes all sources
of energy to meet the world’s growing energy
demand while reducing GHG emissions.

Our focus is on leading in lower carbon
intensity energy production and supporting the
development of non-fuel applications for crude
oil, targeting the highest impact solutions across
our value chain.

Material topics Relevant metrics Relevant UN SDGs

Climate change Scope 1 emissions (million metric tonnes of CO,e) i ae
(including GHG emissions) Scope 2 emissions (million metric tonnes of CO,e) se | Q e

Upstream carbon intensity (kg CO,e/boe)

Upstream methane emissions (metric tonnes of CH,)

Upstream methane intensity (%)

Flaring intensity (scf/boe)

Flared gas (MMscf)

Energy intensity (thousand Btu/boe)

Learn more about
Aramco’s GHG emissions
management program.

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

The energy landscape

Navigating the energy transition

Toward a low carbon system

Aramco supports the aims of the 2015 Paris
Agreement to limit global temperature increase
in this century to 2 degrees Celsius, while
pursuing efforts to limit the increase even further
to 1.5 degrees, and the commitment of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to achieve net zero
emissions in its economy by 2060. This requires
a transition of the global energy system toward
a low carbon system, requiring thousands of
large-scale projects across multiple sectors. This
presents unprecedented design, engineering,
and implementation challenges. The McKinsey
Global Institute has estimated that a net zero
world will cost around $275 trillion by 2050".

Policymakers, industrial suppliers and customers
recognize that this transition will not be uniform
across geographies. What might be achievable
today in more developed economies will be
distinct from what is appropriate and effective in
emerging markets. Growing markets, particularly
in developing countries, face additional challenges
to their ability to achieve sustainable development
while meeting their needs for affordable, reliable
energy. Reduction in GHG emissions across
Europe and North America will proceed at

a different pace from developing countries.

What does unite all economies and societies

is not only the desire to address the impacts of
climate change, but also the need for affordable,
reliable energy. Across any society, higher energy
prices are a burden that disproportionately
impacts lower income households.

Balancing energy security, affordability
and emissions

Events of the last few years, particularly
COVID-19 and the conflict in Ukraine, have
highlighted the risks of under-investment in
energy sources and underlined the importance
of energy security and energy access.

Alternatives to traditional hydrocarbon-based
energy sources are progressing, but on their
own will be insufficient to meet the world’s
energy demands today and ensure an orderly
energy transition. As COP27 in Sharm El Sheikh
highlighted, many developing economies
depend upon the low-cost and reliability of
hydrocarbons to avoid energy shortages and
cost inflation — and they need realistic solutions
now to ensure economic security, even while
the energy transition develops in parallel.

1, McKinsey Report: “The Net Zero Transition”, January 2022.

Although global energy systems are becoming
more efficient each year, requiring less energy

to meet the same level of economic activity,

the demands of a growing middle-class and
facilitating access to economies and communities
that lack access to energy is leading to a growing
energy demand.

The definition of “affordable, reliable energy”
diverges depending on the society and its
position in the development index. Accordingly,
prudent solutions will require a variety of energy
sources and technologies. For example, around
800 million people do not have access to
electricity and some 3 billion people still depend
on indoor fires for cooking? — their requirements
differ substantially from those living in a highly
advanced economy.

With the focus on energy security and
affordability, Aramco’s continued investment
and capital expenditure to increase supply,
combined with our high level of reliability
and low carbon intensity of production, will
support a global orderly energy transition.

Our 2050 net zero ambition and 2035 GHG
emissions reduction targets keep us focused
on advancing in lower carbon intensity and
abatement technologies and supporting the
development of non-fuel applications for crude
oil. We also continue to invest in the ability
to meet the world’s need for energy sourced
from hydrocarbons. This includes expanding
the gas supply in Saudi Arabia, and exploring
new markets, including for blue hydrogen
and additional non-combustible uses for oil.

A parallel materials transition

At the same time, the global economy is facing
the realities of having to invest in new supply
chains for minerals, metals, and materials.
Without adequate investment in oil and gas,
there remains the risk of raising the cost of the
critical inputs needed for any transition.

Hydrocarbons will increasingly be used without
combustion or where carbon emissions can be
captured and removed. Fuels, such as blue
hydrogen, using CCS technologies, are projected
to increase in demand. Petrochemicals will
provide feedstock essential to the development
of new materials that will play a significant role
in the energy transition — advanced, durable
materials are essential for manufacturing wind
turbines, solar panels, all modes of transportation,

2. Overseas Development Institute ‘Oil and gas, poverty and energy access’.

20

McKinsey Global
Institute has
estimated that

a net zero world
will cost around

$275

trillion by 2050'
storage devices, and infrastructure. The faster
we accelerate the transition, the more of these
materials we will need. Today, chemical products
made from oil and gas enable over 90% of all
manufactured goods.

Energy transition scenarios

Scenario planning has been integral to Aramco’s
decision-making process for around a decade.
The first scenarios were developed in 2014,
depicting four pathways to the future energy
landscape our business operates in. We have
updated the scenarios five times since the start of
this journey, each time successively incorporating
the increasingly complex nature of our business
amid a fast-paced transition. During this decade,
the energy world has endured a major downturn
in oil price cycles, a pandemic, and several
geopolitical events. Scenarios and outlooks

have been critically important to strategic
dialogues within our Company.

The Company employs in-house expert
economists and analysts to develop these
scenarios. A wide range of internal and external
stakeholders are engaged to determine the
drivers of future energy landscapes, our
strategies, and investment decisions. These

and other important determinants, such as
policy developments and climate goals, and
technological progress form the basis of

our scenario pathways.

Environmental

sustainability pctocdability

Once the scenario pathways are defined, they
are modeled using a proprietary energy analytics
system. Scenario outputs include global economic
indicators, energy market fundamentals, and GHG
emission projections.

In our latest set of scenarios, we have used the
energy trilemma framework, first developed by
the World Energy Council, to determine alternate
pathways for the future. The framework utilizes
affordability, energy security and environmental
sustainability as three policy objectives that
require balance and trade-offs. Each of our
scenarios accentuates one dimension of the
energy trilemma triangle, while a fourth scenario
depicts a balanced approach to these trade-offs.

Aramco’s integrated energy and economic modeling system

Aramco developed its proprietary energy solutions
platform in collaboration with a number of industry-
leading energy data providers and modelers. The
platform is a computer-based integrated solution
comprised of global economic and energy models.
These models represent energy supply (oil, gas, and
coal), demand (transportation, residential, commercial,
and industrial), conversion (refining, power, and
petrochemicals), and macroeconomics.

The system operates in an integrated manner with eight
different sub-modules including economics, energy
demand, climate, oil supply, gas supply, coal supply,
refining, and petrochemicals. The system is capable of
modeling at a country-level on 26 sub-sectors, 25 fuel
types, energy carriers including electricity and hydrogen,
and GHG emissions.

Climate
model
Natural
| 7

Macro- Energy i
economy demand
ens

=

==

7

Petro-

chemicals

21

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAl TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Climate change and the energy transition

Our climate change and
energy transition framework

Our corporate strategy is based on producing Our climate change and energy transition
hydrocarbons that have one of the lowest framework is informed by the circular carbon
upstream production costs and carbon intensities | economy principles of reduce, reuse, recycle
in the world, and supporting a global orderly and remove.

energy transition towards a lower carbon
emissions future through investing in
technologies and offering lower carbon
products, including e-fuels.

We have four areas of focus that provide the
framework for our climate change initiatives
and investments:

Differentiate Sustain Diversify

Leading in low carbon Supporting the transition to Developing and growing
intensity operations low-impact energy pathways low-impact value chains

GHG emissions management Lower carbon fuels and transport Non-metallics

technologies
Flaring and methane reduction —_-TT——__ Liquids-to-chemicals

Hydrogen
Energy management Renewable energy investment

In-Company renewables

Enable

Collaboration with partners Carbon capture and storage Leveraging technology

to develop and deploy Developing offsets and supporting
technologies and infrastructure carbon markets

at speed and scale

Read about how Aramco
seeks to adopt the
principles of the circular

carbon economy.

22
Differentiate | Sustain

Leading tn low carbon

intensity operations

GHG emissions management

We recognize the need to reduce our GHG and
methane emissions and have ambitions and
targets to reduce carbon emissions associated
with our operations.

Our emissions reduction strategy includes
investing in low-emission technologies, including
CCS, energy efficiency programs and energy mix
diversification. We are committed to developing
and deploying innovative solutions, optimizing
operations, and adopting efficient project designs.

Aramco’s industry leading low carbon intensity
production performance is the result of almost
half a century of careful reservoir management
and investment in efficiency, reducing flaring
and produced water management. This has
yielded an environmental advantage that forms
a key pillar of our corporate strategy. We are
confident that we can help the world meet its
rising energy needs, while reducing emissions
from our operations.

Net zero ambition

Aramco’s ambition is to reduce GHG emissions
from our operations and achieve a net zero
GHG emissions footprint by 2050 across our
wholly-owned operated assets.

Having undertaken analysis to support this
corporate ambition, we know that achieving

net zero operational emissions while we grow
our business to meet global energy demand will
be a huge challenge.

It requires internal targets to be set for our
businesses and assets, and for these targets to be
embedded into our business planning, to ensure
capital expenditure and resource requirements
are in place.

What are we doing?

Na

Diversify | Enable

Climate change risk and mitigation

Climate change is considered a top corporate priority for us and we assess
this on a medium to long-term horizon. Our response to climate change
is embedded in our business strategy, supported by our climate change
and energy transition framework and our five GHG reduction initiatives.

Risk Mitigation

* Climate-related demand scenarios to
inform business decision making

Policy: Policies restricting or
banning use of fossil fuels, or
applying a cost on carbon

Technology: Adoption of
disruptive technologies and/or
slow development of GHG
reduction technologies

Accelerated development of our
technology portfolios, including synthetic
fuels, CCUS and CCS technologies,

e.g., Jubail CCS Hub

Market: Loss of demand for
hydrocarbons as customers move
to achieve their GHG targets

Diversification into low GHG emitting
products, e.g., chemicals and hydrogen

Legal: Potential exposure to
climate-related litigation

Accurate and transparent reporting and
disclosures with independent assurance

Reputation: Impact on corporate * Stakeholder engagement, including
reputation independent external consultants
and subject matter experts to advise
on reporting and disclosures, and explain
the Company’s energy transition pathway

What are we doing?

Emissions management starts at the subsurface

Our philosophy of sustainable reservoir management is key in reducing
our upstream carbon intensity. Instead of maximizing production from
wells which could irreversibly damage them, we prioritize the long-term
health of our reservoirs. This entails producing our fields at low depletion
rates to prevent premature water breakthrough, reducing the quantity of
produced water.

Using advanced reservoir modeling and real-time data, our geoscientists
and engineers steer multilateral wells with maximum reservoir contact to
ensure optimum well placement which help minimize water production.
Additionally, these wells are equipped with smart completions which
enable shutting off when detecting water. Such practices result in
superior produced water management and low water oil ratios (WOR).

When the production of water is minimized, less energy is required for
fluid separation, treatment and disposal. These energy savings result in
lower carbon emissions. As a consequence, Aramco’s average WOR is
significantly lower than the global average, and hence our upstream
carbon intensity is amongst the lowest globally.

23

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain

GHG emissions targets

In parallel with our intensity targets, we are
aiming to reduce our net annual Scope 1 and
Scope 2 GHG emissions from both the upstream
and downstream businesses by 52 MMtCO,e
from our business as usual 2035 forecast emissions.

By 2035, consistent with the corporate growth
strategy in oil and gas production and
development of new businesses, particularly
hydrogen and liquids-to-chemicals, we forecast
our business as usual Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG
emissions for our wholly-owned operated assets
will increase to 119 MMtCO,e. Our goal is to
mitigate this growth in emissions and reduce
our emissions to 67 MMtCO,¢ by 2035.

Digital twins

Our EXPEC Computer Center developed

a solution to reduce energy intensity and
emissions associated with operating subsurface
artificial lift systems, leveraging digital twin
technology by optimizing the performance
of our electric submersible pumps (ESP).

The system was trial tested across 42 ESP lifted
wells resulting in a 22% average reduction in
power consumption, equivalent to 12 GWh

of energy savings during 2022. It is projected
that deploying this solution across all fields will
result in a 25% average reduction in artificial
lift energy intensity at Company level.

XY

Targeted GHG reduction

Our Yanbu’ Refinery facility successfully
obtained the International Sustainability and
Carbon Certification under its circular cracker
oil initiative. The initiative drives the
certification relates to an in-house sustainable
circular route to produce circular cracker oil
from waste oil to reduce our Scope 2 GHG
carbon footprint.

X

1, 2018 was the first year our GHG inventory was independently assured.

Diversify | Enable

Scope 1 and Scope 2
emissions upstream “=

intensity: 15%
reduction by 2035 |

(kg CO,e/boe)

-|5%

2035

During 2022, we have made progress toward
achieving our 2035 and 2050 ambitions across
our five identified levers: energy efficiency,
reduced methane and flaring; increased
renewables; CCS; and offsets to address
emissions we cannot reduce or capture. For more
information on our 2022 efforts and impact,
please refer to pages 26 and 27.

We have also been conducting site-level
bottom-up assessments of what it would take

to decarbonize our assets, Once this is completed
in 2023, we will update our decarbonization
strategy in the next report.

GHG emissions

The Company’s GHG emissions management
program monitors direct (Scope 1) and indirect
(Scope 2) emissions from wholly-owned operated
assets, in a manner consistent with the GHG
Protocol. Despite increased hydrocarbon
production by 10% in 2022, total emissions
(Scope 1 emissions and Scope 2 emissions) from
the Company and its operationally controlled
entities increased by only 6% (71.8 MMtCO,e

in 2022 versus 67.8 MMtCO,e in 2021) compared
to the previous year.

This was enabled by more efficient operations
and a reduction in flaring intensity by 17%
compared to the previous year due to improved
operations of the Company’s in-house flare gas
recovery systems across several facilities. For
more information on our flaring, please refer
to page 28.

2. This figure has undergone external limited assurance in accordance to the ISAE 3000 (revised). The assurance report can be found online here.

24

Scope 1 and Scope 2
emissions GHG reduction
targeted by 2035

(MMtCO,e)

Forecast
business-as-
usual growth

2022
2035
2035

Our Southern Area
Oil Operations
won a 2022 Society
of Petroleum
Engineers Regional
Distinguished
Corporate Support
Award for reducing
its emissions by

600,000

tCO,e
Scope 1 emissions Scope 2 emissions Upstream carbon intensity

(MMitCO,e) (MMtCO,e)

D2./ lol

$2233
22 il

2020

Upstream carbon intensity

The Company’s 2022 upstream carbon intensity
figure remains among the lowest in the industry
at 10.3’ kg CO,e/boe (2021: 10.7' kg CO,e/boe).

This improvement is predominantly driven by
energy efficiency, and reduced flaring across
Upstream operations due to improved reliability
and performance of our flare gas recovery
systems (FGRS). In 2022, two new FGRS became
operational in both Abu Ali and Qatif central
processing facility resulting in estimated annual
flared gas recovery of over 1.0 bscf per year.

Aramco is leveraging its R&D and technology
initiatives to develop, and implement innovative
approaches that could help lower emissions
across our industry and have potential
application in other industries.

For more details on what we have done during
2022 regarding our progress on our five levers
to meet our 2035 interim GHG targets, please
refer to pages 26-27.

Scope 3 — value chain emissions

Our focus is on measurement, reporting, and
management of those emissions within our direct
control. To date, we have not reported Scope 3
emissions from our supply chain or from
customers’ use of our products. We are working
on supporting the global energy transition towards
a lower carbon emissions future through investing
in technologies and working with suppliers to
integrate ESG performance measures through

our iktva program.

No

{kg CO,e/boe)

10.3

20 ——— TTI
2! ——TT
rey
2 ———TTTY

2021

TTY

Our investment in hydrogen, chemicals and
renewable energy sources and the increasing share
of gas in our production provide products that

will support the global energy transition towards

a lower carbon emissions future. We continue

to invest in a number of product stewardship
partnerships and technologies to reduce emissions,
this includes research and development into low
emissions transport solutions.

During 2022, we increased our R&D spend

on developing potential solutions that will assist
the global energy transition towards a lower
carbon emissions future — notably over a 45%
increase in sustainable mobility R&D spend and
over 380% increase in crude to chemicals R&D
spend, reflecting the increasing importance of
these areas to our future business. For more
details on our R&D spend, please refer to

pages 40-41.

What are we doing?

Vessel Speed Program

To support the national and corporate GHG reduction aspirations, our
terminals instituted the Vessel Speed Program reducing the speed of
vessels sailing through the Ras Tanura and Ju‘aymah Port to 12 knots
from 15 knots. 12 knots was determined as the optimal speed based
on vessel engine efficiency, while minimizing impact on customers’
satisfaction or our reliability. It is estimated that the program has reduced
the GHG emissions of visiting ships by more than 90,000 tCO,e per year.
Ne

. This figure has undergone external limited assurance in accordance to the ISAE 3000 (revised). The assurance report can be found online here.
. The Jazan Refinery (our downstream refinery) is excluded from our current GHG reporting because in 2022, it remains in the startup and stabilization phase and is not fully

operational. Aramco is working to stabilize the refinery’s operations and complete all necessary reporting configurations before the end of 2023. Reporting on the refinery’s
environmental and sustainability elements will commence immediately thereafter, in line with the Company’s commitment to operational transparency.

w

. Fadhili Gas Plant is excluded from 2020 GHG emissions inventory.

cs

. These emission reductions were calculated from real vessel performance data at different speeds and application of the International Maritime Organization guidelines. Prior to

implementation, terminals benchmarked the initiative with other worldwide ports, such as Los Angeles and San Diego in the United States, and other countries including Canada

and Singapore.

25

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAl TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain

Diversify | Enable

GHG reduction initiatives to 2035

Levers to achieve
interim targets

To achieve reductions in GHG
emissions by 2035, we are focusing
on five key levers: energy efficiency
across our upstream and
downstream assets; further
reductions in methane and flaring;
increased use of renewable energy
sources; CCS; and development or
purchase of offsets to help address
hard-to-abate emissions.

GHG reductions
targeted by 2035

Energy efficiency

Our plans

* Continue to sustain/improve
energy intensity

* Optimize co-generation and
steam systems

* Ensure energy efficiency in new
project design

* Expand utilization and application
of the energy efficiency digital
solutions

* Initiatives include gas turbine
upgrades, boiler and fired heater
efficiency improvements

Our actions in 2022

* Achieving a 3% improvement
in energy intensity performance
compared to last year

Implementation of new energy
efficiency technologies in our
industrial and non-industrial
facilities

Using modern low NOx burner
technologies to boost fuel efficiency

Enhancing hydrogen blending
capabilities for current boilers

Upgrading and optimizing
operation of boilers, steam traps,
and fired heaters

36 organizations received the
ISO 50001 certification for their
energy management system

Introducing new strategies for
implementing energy conservation
initiatives for more than

700 buildings

Flaring and methane

Our plans

¢ Commitment to OGCI near zero
upstream methane intensity by
2030 and the World Bank's “Zero
Routine Flaring by 2030” initiative

* Further enhance LDAR (Leak
Detection and Repair) Program

* Unmanned aerial vehicles and
satellite methane detection

Our actions in 2022

« Achieved our lowest ever flaring
intensity

« Upstream methane intensity

of 0.05%

Implementing a Flaring

Minimization Roadmap, with

site-specific priorities across

Aramco operations

Investing in and developing
innovative flaring reduction
technologies

Introducing a smart flaring
monitoring system

Installing high efficiency burners
As part of the LDAR program,
surveyed thousands of points
across our operations in the
Kingdom to minimize methane
leaks

Installed two new Flare Gas
Recovery Systems at Abu Ali and
Qatif Central Processing Facility

~\
NS y ~52'

MMtC0,e

1. This figure may not match up due to rounding.

26

|

MMtCO,e

Cy

MMtCO,e
Renewables

Our plans

* Commitment to invest in 12 GW
of solar and wind energy by 2030
for our business and also in
support of the Kingdom's National
Renewable Program

Our actions in 2022

* Sudair Solar PV Plant has
reached 56% completion — power
generation expected to start in
Q4, 2024

* Approved installation of
renewable systems to power
20 offshore water injection wells
at Berri and Zuluf

* Installing PV systems to power
Aramco’s remote pipelines load

CCS

Our plans

* Jubail CCS hub to capture up to
11 MMtpa by 2035 — contributing
towards the Kingdom reaching its
goal of 44 MMtpa of CCUS by 2035

« Jubail Hub targeted to store
9 MMipa, with Phase 1 capturing
around 6 MMtpa by 2027 from
gas plants at Wasit, Fadhili and
Khursaniyah, plus circa 3 MMtpa
from other industry sources

* Phase 2 will capture around
5 MMtpa and may include CO,
from other facilities

Offsets

Our plans
* Develop carbon offsets from
natural climate solutions

Ambition to plant 300 million
mangroves in Saudi Arabia and
350 million mangroves outside the
Kingdom by 2035 — expected to
remove and offset an estimated
16 MMtCO,e by 2035

Assist in developing a credible and
functioning carbon credit market
in the Kingdom for carbon offsets
and credits produced in the MENA
region

Our actions in 2022

« Joint Agreement signed with
SLB and Linde to build the Jubail
CCS hub

* Identified 9 MMtpa of storage
capacity with CO, injection
expected by 2027

* Captured around 238 MtCO,
from our pilot Hawiyah Natural
Gas Plant resulting in a cumulative
total of about 1,570 MtCO, stored
in the reservoir, since the CO,
injection started in 2015

Our actions in 2022

« Participated, and purchased
credits, in the first carbon credit
auction held in 2022 through
the Regional Voluntary Carbon
Market in Saudi Arabia

Ji

|

MMtCO,e

or:

MMtCO,e

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain

Flaring and methane

Flaring of waste gases has long been recognized
as one of the most significant contributors to
GHG emissions in the oil and gas sector. Aramco
has been a pioneer in gas flaring reduction and
now has industry-leading methane intensity and
gas flaring metrics.

Minimizing flaring

Aramco is a signatory to the World Bank's

“Zero Routine Flaring by 2030” initiative and is
committed to sharing best practices with industry
partners to accelerate global flaring reduction.

During 2022, our flaring intensity fell by 17%,
(4.60' scf/boe in 2022 versus 5.51 scf/boe in 2021)
due to significant investments, installations and
improved operations of our in-house flare gas
recovery systems across several facilities and

a reduction in routine and non-routine flaring.
From April 2022, two new FGRS became fully
operational in both Abu Ali and Qatif central
processing facility, which will result in an
expected annual reduction of 1.5 bscf per year.

Substantial investments and developments

in innovative flaring reduction technologies
continued throughout 2022. These included
implementing the Flaring Minimization
Roadmap, which has identified priorities across
Aramco operations, with every operating facility
having a flare minimization plan and targets.

Aramco’s operations are monitored in real-time
at our Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) Center
in Dhahran. This has enabled us to achieve
near zero routine flaring already. We have
maintained a flare volume of < 1% of total raw
gas production since 2012.

Methane

Addressing methane emissions is one of the
fastest, most effective ways to slow the rate
of global temperature rise.

An enhanced Leak Detection and Repair
program for the Company's methane emissions
in the Kingdom prioritizes actions at operating
facilities. Hundreds of thousands of points are
surveyed across our operations to minimize
potential methane leaks. We use drones to
monitor and measure methane emissions from
our operating facilities.

Diversify | Enable

Upstream methane
intensity
(%)

(scf/ooe)

Q.05

200

N
S
a

In addition to LDAR, we are assessing and
deploying remote detection solutions and
technologies such as the use of satellite
monitoring.

srry

Aramco's upstream methane intensity measures
the ratio of our upstream methane emissions
for operated assets against the quantity of
marketed natural gas. Our upstream methane
intensity remained low in 2022 at 0.05% (0.05%
in 2021) and is already well below the OGCI
ambition to achieve at least 0.20% by 2025.

4.60 |

Flaring intensity

537>

wr

2020

We have maintained
a flare volume of

< l%

of total raw gas
production
since 2012

Two technologies

of flaring emissions:

programs.

replacing continuous flaring and emissions.

In 2022, two technologies were piloted to enhance the management

* A flaring monitoring system detects flaring performance and optimizes
burner feed inputs via cameras equipped with artificial intelligence

* We piloted portable ignition systems for on-demand flaring needs,

1. This figure has undergone external limited assurance in accordance to the ISAE 3000 (revised). The assurance report can be found online here.

2. The Jazan Refinery (our downstream refinery) is excluded from our current GHG reporting because in 2022, it remains in the startup and stabilization phase and is not fully
operational, Aramco is working to stabilize the refinery’s operations and complete all necessary reporting configurations before the end of 2023. Reporting on the refinery’s
environmental and sustainability elements will commence immediately thereafter, in line with the Company’s commitment to operational transparency.

3. Fadhili Gas Plant is excluded from our 2020 reporting.

28
Energy management

Co-generation

Highly efficient co-generation plants enable
us to produce electricity as a byproduct of our
operations and are enabling self-sufficiency

in electrical power generation for our own
operating plants. We are retrofitting some of
our existing plants with co-generation systems
to create energy, as well as heat for oil and gas
production processes.

We analyze the real-time data of the power
generated, which allows us to streamline our
carbon footprint.

We are harnessing what would otherwise be
waste energy by maximizing the conversion

of energy released from the combustion of

fuel into power and steam to achieve improved
thermal energy efficiency and reduce overall
GHG emissions. In 2022, we achieved an average
thermal efficiency of 70.7% (70.8% in 2021)

in our interconnected co-generation facilities.

Energy efficiency

The Company seeks to reduce energy
consumption at facilities, design new facilities
to be energy efficient, and promote energy
efficiency in Saudi Arabia.

While our reporting boundary has expanded
as per footnote 1 below, in 2022, at a Company
in-Kingdom level, the energy intensity was
112.9 thousand Btu/boe (a fall of 3% from

prior year), which demonstrates continued
improvement in our energy efficiency initiatives
across our business.

We started an energy efficiency management
program in 2000. The program has evolved
through the implementation of energy efficiency
initiatives such as process improvements, fuel gas
optimization, higher co-generation utilization,
continuous performance monitoring of
significant energy users, reduction in energy for
crude oil transportation, and load management
of top energy users.

Energy intensity
(thousand Btu/boe)

46.2

Several initiatives have been planned to improve

energy efficiency, including:

« Upgrading of simple cycle gas turbines with
energy efficient combined cycle systems;

= Replacement of older inefficient boilers with
highly efficient fast ramp up boilers; and

2021

2020 TTT
116.614
Try

= Implementation of advanced digital solutions
to improve energy efficiency performance.

At the end of 2022, all our operational facilities
have received the ISO 50001 certification for
their energy management system (EnMS). EnMS
enables our facilities to focus on an ongoing,
sustained improvement in energy efficiency,
and reduction in greenhouse gas emissions,
along with monetary savings as a result of
smarter energy utilization and improved energy
efficiency.

As of 2022, we
achieved an average
thermal efficiency of

10./%

in our interconnected
co-generation
facilities

that accurately forecast energy demand.

Innovative Energy Project of the Year Award

Aramco won the Innovative Energy Project of the Year Award from the
Association of Energy Engineers in recognition of implementing the
Energy Demand Forecasting Solution in Oil and Gas facilities. The
solution was recognized due to its novel machine learning capabilities

. As we progress on our reporting journey and our controls around ESG data mature, for this metric from 2022 onwards, we have expanded the reporting boundary from Company

in-Kingdom to operational control. The 2021 and 2020 figures are at a Company in-Kingdom level only. In 2022, at a Company in-Kingdom level, the energy intensity was

112.9 thousand Btu/boe,

N

. The Jazan Refinery is excluded from our reporting because in 2022, it remains in the startup and stabilization phase and is not fully operational. Aramco is working to stabilize

the refinery’s operations and complete all necessary reporting configurations before the end of 2023. Reporting on the refinery’s environmental and sustainability elements will
commence immediately thereafter, in line with the Company’s commitment to operational transparency.

w

. Fadhili Gas Plant is excluded from our 2020 reporting.

4. This figure has undergone external limited assurance in accordance to the ISAE 3000 (revised). The assurance report can be found online here.

29

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAl TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate

Sustain | Diversify | Enable

Pathways to lower carbon energy

Aramco’s strategy is to increase its production
of hydrocarbons while seeking to maximize
opportunities for lower carbon products.

We recognize the need to reduce emissions

and support a global orderly energy transition
towards a lower carbon emissions future through
investing in technologies and offering lower
carbon products, such as e-fuels, and working
with suppliers, to integrate ESG performance
measures through our iktva program.

Low carbon fuels and transport
technologies

Achieving sustainable mobility requires
collaboration across the value chain to meet
consumer demand for affordable, low emission
transport. Electric vehicles are fast growing and
will play an important role in mitigating climate
change when integrated with renewable
electricity, However, in the near term, transport
electrification alone is unlikely to be adequate
to meet global CO, mitigation goals. This has

to be complemented by advanced combustion
engines, fuel cell vehicles, and low carbon fuels,
including renewable fuels and hydrogen.

Sustainable mobility

Aramco has around 100 scientists and engineers
in four locations across the world working on
the challenges of sustainable mobility. Through
our global network, we are working to create
breakthrough transportation technologies

with the goal of improving efficiency that has
the potential to reduce emissions — both CO,
and other air pollutants, including NOx and
particulates.

We are seeking to redesign internal combustion
engines, and the fuels that power them including
advanced combustion systems, novel engine
architectures, and innovative after treatment
systems.

We have two flagship projects that aim to
advance the development of low carbon
synthetic fuels, one in Spain and another in
Saudi Arabia. Aramco’s low carbon synthetic
fuels plan is to combine CO, captured from
industrial processes or directly from the air with
green hydrogen and target a CO, reduction
potential of at least 80% on a lifecycle basis.

30

We are researching:

\_ Gasoline compression ignition

\_ Opposed piston engines

|_ Turbulent jet ignition

For more information

\_ilute boost engines

on advanced engine
technologies see
our website

72
IF

Scan here

What are we doing?

Demonstrating sustainable fuels through
Formula racing

Building on our strategic partnership with Formula 1 (F1) to accelerate
our engineering excellence and achieve our respective net zero targets,
we are working closely with F1 to support their goal of fully switching
to sustainable fuels by 2026.

In February 2022, Aramco entered into a strategic partnership with the
Aston Martin Aramco Cognizant Formula One™ Team to promote the
development of highly efficient internal combustion engines to
accelerate high performance sustainable fuels and advanced lubricants,
making use of the diverse technologies Aramco has developed.

Beyond F1, Aramco signed a Memorandum of Understanding with
Formula Motorsport Limited to introduce alternative, lower carbon fuels
in the Formula 2 and Formula 3 racing championships beginning

in 2023.

Through this collaboration, we plan to demonstrate the potential of
liquid synthetic fuels to reduce emissions both in motorsport and the
broader transportation sector.

What are we doing?

Aramco Ventures and our
$1.5 billion Sustainability Fund

Aramco Ventures is our venture capital vehicle,
that invests globally in innovative startup companies.

Aramco Ventures supports three key elements of Aramco’s
overall strategy:

* Commitment to innovation and technology leadership.

* Supporting our digitalization journey and use of Fourth
Industrial Revolution (IR 4.0) technologies.

* Supporting the Company’s sustainability ambitions and
development of new lower carbon energy solutions.

As we accelerate the implementation of our vision to become

the world’s preeminent integrated energy and chemicals

company, the breadth of our businesses, operations, and

geographic presence offer unique opportunities to pilot and

deploy the technologies created within the startup companies

we invest in.

Launched in 2022, Aramco Ventures’ new $1.5 billion

Sustainability Fund will accelerate the Company’s progress

towards developing and using innovative solutions to address

the climate challenge, and represents a major expansion

of our sustainability investment activities.

The Sustainability Fund’s focus is on sectors closely aligned

with Aramco’s decarbonization and lower carbon energy

solutions business strategies, including:

* Carbon capture, utilization and storage;

* Renewable energy and energy storage;

* Energy efficiency technologies;

* Nature-based solutions;

* Hydrogen and ammonia value chains;

» Synthetic renewable fuels, including direct air capture; and

* Digital sustainability solutions.

Tune
INVEST eng,
INTIATIVE

The Sustainability Fund builds on Aramco Ventures’ existing
strategic venturing program, which invests in companies
developing technologies with strategic importance to
Aramco to accelerate their development and deployment

in Aramco’s operations.

This fund has invested in various companies since inception,
with three companies achieving IPO, six reaching “Unicorn”
status, and more than 25 technologies deployed in Aramco.
This fund will continue to operate focusing on digital and
industrial technology domains.

Our $1.5 billion Sustainability Fund will be among the largest
sustainability focused venture capital programs announced
globally, and the largest by any oil and gas producer.

It will join Aramco Ventures’ other investment programs:

* Asa founding member of the OGCI, Aramco participates
in OGCI's Climate Investments Fund. This is a $1 billion fund
that includes the participation of 11 major oil and gas
companies. It is focused on investments in carbon capture,
utilization, and storage, methane emissions reduction, and
carbon dioxide emissions reduction in the oil and gas and
transport sectors.

Prosperity7, Aramco’s $1 billion diversified growth
venturing program invests in disruptive technologies and
start-ups outside of the energy sector. The program focuses
on investing in highly scalable start-ups in the U.S. and
China. The program has made over 25 investments to date.

1. Unicorn companies are those that reach a valuation of $1 billion without being listed on the stock market.

31

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain | Diversify | Enable

Hydrogen

Hydrogen is a primary element in oil and gas,
and holds significant potential as a clean,
affordable energy that could support emissions
reductions in hard-to-decarbonize sectors such
as heavy-duty transport, heating, and industrial
applications. We believe hydrogen has significant
potential to provide a material reduction in

GHG emissions, as a global market develops over
the next decade.

Hydrocarbon’s crucial role in the development
of a global hydrogen business

Despite the interest and possibility of producing
hydrogen from multiple energy sources, in

the short and medium term, hydrocarbons will
remain the primary feedstock for its production.

Hydrogen has the potential to become a
tradeable commodity, which opens commercial
opportunities for our business over the medium
to long term.

At the same time, investments in low carbon
hydrogen can help foster new technological

and industrial development in economies around
the world, while also creating skilled jobs.

Natural gas and hydrogen

Natural gas has the potential to be a viable,
cost-effective feedstock for blue hydrogen
production. Natural gas is the most used
feedstock for hydrogen production today.

Aramco is a steering member of The Hydrogen
Council, a CEO-led organization that promotes
collaboration between governments, industry
and investors to provide guidance on
accelerating the deployment of hydrogen
solutions globally.

32

Blue hydrogen certification

In 2022, Aramco and the SABIC Agri-Nutrients Company obtained the
world’s first independent certifications recognizing “blue” hydrogen and
ammonia production.

The certification was granted by an independent testing, inspection

and certification agency based in Germany, to SABIC AN, in Jubail, for
37,800 tonnes of blue ammonia and to Aramco’s wholly-owned refinery
(SASREF), also in Jubail, for 8,075 tonnes of blue hydrogen.

To certify ammonia and hydrogen as “blue” a significant part of the CO,
associated with the manufacturing process must be captured and utilized
in downstream applications.

Capitalizing on this agreement, we made the world’s first commercial
shipment of blue ammonia to South Korea.

Differentiate | Sustain

Diversify | Enable

Developing and growing lower
environmental impact value chains

The energy transition offers challenges but also
various opportunities for us to diversify our
portfolio into new, lower impact value chains,
including utilizing hydrocarbons for non-
combustion uses, such as non-metallic materials
and chemical applications, as well as investment
in renewables projects.

Such actions provide us with commercial
opportunities and help improve our resilience
to changes in customer demands caused by the
energy transition.

The materials transition

According to a report issued this year by the
Atlantic Council, a net zero energy system will be
six times as mineral intensive as its hydrocarbon-
based predecessor. However, the supply chains
needed to deliver these minerals are significantly
underdeveloped and undercapitalized; there is

a projected $2 trillion investment gap over the
next 15 years for the minerals needed to limit
climate change — the world is underprepared
for the risk of surging transition-related mineral
demand. For example, one megawatt of installed
renewable energy capacity utilizes eight to

11 tonnes of petrochemicals-based materials.

Energy demand is projected to more than double
from 79 gigatonnes in 2011 to 167 gigatonnes

in 2060. Materials production, use, and eventual
disposal already accounts for almost a quarter

of all global CO, emissions. The increase in
materials use, even if decoupled from economic
growth, will be accompanied by a further rise

in CO, emissions, particularly in hard-to-abate-
industries.

For example, emissions from concrete are
projected to total almost four gigatonnes of CO,
by 2050 because of the growth in demand.
Meanwhile, the iron and steel sector accounts for
more emissions than the whole of road freight,
and global demand for steel alone is expected

to rise by more than a third by 2050.

To achieve an accelerated materials transition,
cutting-edge R&D, innovation, and the necessary
investments are essential.

At Aramco, we see opportunities arising from
the materials transition. Steel, concrete and

other traditional materials are responsible

for significant CO, emissions. Non-metallic
materials, (e.g. polymers) and other carbon-
based materials, can provide durable materials
at a lower GHG impact with potential use in
housing, construction, infrastructure, automotive,
and renewables. At Aramco, we are working
across them all.

No matter which energy transition scenario plays
out, oil demand from the petrochemicals sector
is likely to remain robust. In fact, under a net zero
scenario, petrochemicals could account for more
than half of total global oil demand by 2050.

The more intense the transition, the more
important petrochemicals will be to the oil and
gas industry, and other industries. Our pursuit
of sustainable materials is underpinned by a
powerful business case that is driving our world
leading chemicals growth ambitions — making
our business portfolio even more robust.

There is a projected

$2 trillion

investment gap
over the next

15 years for the
minerals needed to
limit climate change

33

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain | Diversify | Enable

Liquids-to-chemicals

Our 2020 acquisition of a 70% stake in SABIC
brought together two global companies
committed to growth and value creation

in petrochemicals.

This propels our strategy to convert up to

4 million barrels per day of liquids-to-chemicals.

More advanced, more sustainable materials
would strengthen the power of our net zero
ambition and our chemicals’ strategies. To earn
a larger share of the materials market in high
volume applications, we must be cost and

GHG competitive.

In 2022, we announced the first large-scale
deployment of our crude to chemicals cracking
technology at our S-Oil integrated downstream
hub in Korea and a joint project between
Aramco and SABIC to develop a crude-to-
chemicals complex in Ras Al-Khair.

These are major steps forward in our
downstream business, and show the power
of technical innovations to meet our ambitions.

Conversion of crude oil into chemicals diverts
our carbon from the transportation fuel value
chain into durable goods.

Our chemicals business spans production

of basic chemicals such as aromatics, olefins,
and polyolefins to more complex products such
as polyols, isocyanates, and synthetic rubber.

Our crude-to-chemicals technologies have

the potential to deliver higher chemical yields.
By converting crude oil directly to chemicals,
we will optimize or eliminate several energy-
intensive industrial processes, creating cost and
operational efficiencies that result in high value
chemical product streams.

34

TC2C™ — Thermal Crude to Chemicals

The TC2C™ platform was designed by Aramco and its partners to
produce greater than 70% chemicals from every barrel of crude oil,
while maintaining top tier efficiency. To reduce CO, emissions while also
improving profitability, TC2C™ deploys a simplification of the crude oil
separation process, relative to a traditional fuels-directed refinery,
thereby reducing energy and utility requirements. The reuse of heat
from the steam cracking section reduces energy consumption even
further.

The optimized integration of the hydroprocessing reactor platforms into
a single high-pressure loop enables a significant reduction of equipment
count compared to more traditional approaches. Furthermore, through
careful management of high-value streams such as hydrogen, and by
internally recycling low-value streams, production of waste from the
process is minimized.

Such efficiencies in energy and material use are major factors in reducing
the carbon footprint and capital expenditure of a TC2C™ facility.

TC2C™ was selected in 2022 for its first commercial deployment,
as part of our S-Oil integrated downstream hub (Shaheen project)
in South Korea.

For more
information on
our chemicals
business,
please refer to
our website

Scan here

Non-metallics

Non-metallics are materials such as plastics

and other such applications, that can replace
traditional materials and minerals. They can
provide improved performance and lower
maintenance costs and have potentially lower life
cycle costs, with greater resistance to corrosion,
and a lower carbon footprint than like-for-like
alternatives.

In the oil and gas industry, plastics are already
being used for various applications, such as in
pipelines. In the future, carbon fiber reinforced
plastics will be used to manufacture large
diameter pipelines with greater strength and
operating efficiency than legacy steel-based
pipelines.

Today, the cost of advanced composite materials
are becoming more competitive and we need

to continue to invest in R&D in this sector — by
finding new solutions and efficiencies, we can
help drive the adoption of new materials at scale
across the globe and thereby help meet net zero
ambitions.

Renewable energy investments
Renewable energy, including power from solar
and wind, is an energy source required under
any energy transition scenario. With more than
320 sunny days per year and ample wind,

Saudi Arabia’s geography and climate hold great
potential for harnessing these renewable energy
sources. Deployment of renewable resources
within the Kingdom will reduce GHG emissions
and support long-term prosperity.

The Saudi government has established a National
Renewable Program with the goal of increasing
the generation capacity of renewable energy
sources to over 58 GW by 2030. 40 GW is planned
from solar, 16 GW from wind energy and the
balance from other renewable energy sources.

Aramco is supporting the Kingdom on this
journey and has committed to investing in 12 GW
of solar and wind energy by 2030 by being part
of a consortium led by ACWA Power to develop
the 1.5 GW Suadair solar plant, a key project in
Saudi Arabia’s renewable energy push. We will
use the allocation of renewable energy credits
fron these investment toward offsetting the
emissions associated with power supplied

to our operations.

Construction of the Sudair Plant has reached
56%. The project is expected to commence
power generation in Q4, 2024.

What are we doing?

Microalgae

Aramco is exploring various applications for microalgae. The Arabian
Peninsula is ideal for microalgae production with its extensive, unique
sabkha (salt flat) formations along the Arabian Gulf.

Through the photosynthesis process, algae efficiently converts sunlight,
CO,, water, and the available nutrients in the wastewater into a
carbohydrate and protein-rich biomass, and fresh oxygen, which is then
released back into the atmosphere. The resulting biomass can then be
converted into many useful products such as biofuel, animal feed, and
pharmaceuticals.

Sabkhas can be easily converted to saline algae production ponds.
Sabkha areas are in close proximity to many of Aramco’s industrial
facilities, meaning that emissions can be utilized to enrich algae ponds,
increasing the potential for productivity and in turn reduce the
Company's emissions.

Aramco also trialled an artificial carbon capture and algae production
system, known as the “Clima Tree”. This uses a microalgae photobioreactor
integrated with a patented CO, scrubber to capture and store CO, in the
form of a carbonate mineral, and produce algae biomass as a byproduct.
The Clima Tree has been designed by Aramco in collaboration with
Greengroves Environmental Services.

XX

NEXCEL — Non-metallic Excellence
and Innovation Center

Aramco and the China Building Materials Academy (CBMA) launched
NEXCEL, a new Non-metallic Excellence and Innovation Center, to
further advance the use of non-metallic materials in the building and
construction sector.

NEXCEL promotes the development and application of non-metallic
technologies by exploring opportunities for joint projects in research
and development, standards development and adoption, professional
development and certifications, advocacy and international outreach.

NEXCEL joins the Aramco-launched NIC: Non-metallic Innovation Centre
at The Welding Institute in Cambridge, U.K.; and NEx: A Center of
Excellence for Non-metallic Building Materials at the American Concrete
Institute, headquartered in Michigan, USA.

What are we doing?

35

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain | Diversify | Enable

Collaboration with partners to develop
and deploy technologies and infrastructure

at speed and scale

Collaboration with partners to develop and
deploy technologies and infrastructure at speed
and scale is necessary to support emissions
reductions and the development of low carbon
business opportunities.

Working with other companies, including
contractors, industry peers or companies in our
product value chains, and with academia and
research institutes, offers an opportunity to share
learning and risk, and multiply the impact of
investment.

Carbon capture and storage

CCS is identified as a major tool to achieve the
global net zero emissions ambition. Industry
and governments are responding to this.

In 2022, more than 60 new CCS facilities were
announced globally (around a 40% increase
in CCS capacity since last year) and resulting
in the CCS capacity of all CCS facilities under
development globally to 244 MMtCO, per
annum’.

We believe capturing and storing, and, where
possible, reusing CO, has the potential to
significantly reduce global emissions. Saudi Arabia
has the know-how and scale to capture and store
large amounts of CO,, which could be reused and
reutilized. It is an important part of the circular
carbon economy and the central lever to support
the decarbonization of our own business and
operations. It is also an essential element of an
integrated blue ammonia and hydrogen program.
Partnerships will be required for the development
of commercial solutions.

Aramco has set a goal of developing CCS capacity
to capture up to 11 MMtCO, annually by 2035.
The ability to grow our CCS capacity is critical to
our efforts to decarbonize, and will be supported
by government incentives that will help to
develop the infrastructure that will be required.

1. Global CCS Institute - Global Status of CCS 2022 Report.

36

CO, nanobubbles

When CO, is captured in liquid form, CO, bubbles are formed. We are
investigating CO, nanobubbles (CO, bubbles with diameters less than

200 nm) for near wellbore stimulation in conventional formations as they
have the ability to sequester more CO, in the same reservoir than common
larger sized CO, bubbles. CO, nanobubbles are also being considered for
green energy applications, such as algal biocrude production.

For unconventional formations, carbon capture underground treatment
and sequestration technology is being explored to chemically treat
formations with the goal of increasing sequestration capacity.

Ne

In parallel, we are developing opportunities

to use captured CO, for conversion into other
materials or products with higher economic
value and where either combustion is avoided
or lower levels of CO, are emitted, e.g., plastics,
concrete and biofuels.

CO, is a primary building block, which can be
used both directly and as a feedstock. Current
advanced CO, utilization takes place in chemicals
production, mineralization processes, and
plastics and polymer production. We are also
exploring direct air capture — a less mature
technology — with technology partners.

We realize the value that a decarbonization

lever like CCS can achieve and as such we have
fast-tracked the assessment and the development
timeline for our first saline aquifer CO, CCS
project. The assessment entailed the deployment
of multiple rigs to drill evaluation wells, and
simultaneously acquiring all relevant subsurface
data, in order to expedite the technical
evaluation of the saline aquifer sink.

This has lead to the announcement of our
world-scale CCS hub that will have the capacity
to deliver 9 MMtpa of CO, by 2027 and sequester
it in our saline aquifer sink.
What are we doing?

Jubail carbon capture and storage hub

CCS is one of the key elements of the Saudi Green Initiative
and a major contributor to the Kingdom’s plan to achieve
its 2060 net zero ambition.

In November 2022, the Ministry of Energy announced

a target of capturing 44 MMtpa of CO, by 2035. Aramco
is a key partner supporting this ambition, and we signed
a joint development agreement with SLB and Linde in
building a CCS hub in the Jubail industrial zone in the
Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia.

This project will be one of the largest CCS hubs globally,
and plans to capture up to 9 MMtpa of CO, per year from
2027 onwards (Aramco’s share is around 6 MMtpa and
our partners’ share is 3 MMtpa).

Aramco’s planned CCS facilities in Saudi Arabia

Saline aquifers

Fadhili

Jubail CCS hub {

To execute the project, Aramco has signed a joint
development agreement with experts in the field to design,
develop and construct the CCS hub, with a planned
completion date of 2027. Phase one of the CCS hub is
intended to capture around 6 MMtpa CO, by 2027 from
three Aramco gas plants (Fadhili, Khursaniyah, and Wasit).
Phase 2 of the CCS hub is intended to capture around

5 MMtpa by 2035.

By 2035 up to 11 MMtpa of CO, will be captured from
Aramco facilities and transported through a pipeline network
via the Jubail CCS hub and stored below ground in saline
aquifers.

Khursaniyah
Wasit

suai Ara?

Phase 1
| Phase 2

Total

~6

MMtpa

~5

MMtpa

~I1

MMtpa
2027 ————» 2035

37

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain

Concrete and CO, capture

The manufacture of cement — the principal
ingredient of concrete — produces around
7% of annual global GHG emissions.

If the global precast concrete industry
implemented CO, curing technology, it is
estimated it could recycle at least 63 million
tonnes of CO, every year. The actual figure
may potentially be as high as 246 million
tonnes of CO,.

At Aramco, we have developed a pilot
program that has delivered storage of 150 to
200 kg of CO, in a tonne of cement in precast
concrete, or 60 to 80 kg of CO, in 1 m? of
precast concrete, outside of the laboratory

at a precast concrete plant. We achieved this
by combining the CO, with steam.

38

Diversify | Enable

Offsets and carbon credits

A carbon offset is a reduction in emissions

of CO, or other GHGs made to compensate for
emissions made elsewhere. A carbon credit

is an instrument traded in carbon markets
representing this reduction and may take
alternative names such as allowance, permit,
or reduction unit. Aramco seeks to generate
carbon credits by undertaking greenhouse
gas reduction projects.

Aramco has planted

24 milion

mangroves along the
Arabian Gulf and
Red Sea coastlines
and over 3 million
terrestrial native
trees — and we plan
to plant millions
more

The use of offsets is an important part of
Aramco's net zero planning as they enable

the mitigation of hard to abate emissions.

They also allow us to accelerate emissions
reduction action, particularly where alternatives,
such as CCS, are not fully mature.

Carbon reduction operations may include

a variety of techniques, such as natural climate
solutions, or engineered carbon removal.
Commercial arrangements can vary from directly
financed projects and joint ventures, to fund
investments, sustainable financing mechanisms
in the form of carbon credits and direct
purchases of carbon offsets from a voluntary
carbon market.

While all these techniques help to generate
carbon offsets, our goal is to diversify the carbon
offsets portfolio, balancing the carbon footprint
with the value of co-benefits for the communities
and ecosystems where we operate.

Natural climate solutions

Natural climate solutions are conservation,
restoration and improved land management
actions that increase carbon storage or avoid
GHG emissions in landscapes and wetlands
across the globe. Combined with innovations in
clean energy and other efforts to decarbonize
the world’s economies, natural climate solutions
can deliver significant support to combating

to climate change.

Aramco is exploring the use of natural climate
solutions to generate offsets. To date, Aramco
has planted 24 million mangroves along

the Arabian Gulf and Red Sea coastlines and

3 million terrestrial native trees — and we plan
to plant millions more. Mangroves and trees
form a natural sink for CO,,.

Mangrove and native tree planting also restores
natural habitats, encouraging biodiversity, and
act as a natural barrier to coastal erosion.

To develop useable offsets, Aramco plans to
develop baselines, confirm methodologies and
establish third-party measurement and verification
of carbon stored in mangroves and other trees
being planted in Saudi Arabia and abroad.

Aramco is working with external experts to
assess the baseline ecosystem carbon stock
around our existing mangrove forests to support
and facilitate current and future verification
assessments of carbon offsets from natural
climate solutions projects. A third-party
assessment, using The Blue Carbon Initiative
methodology’, was undertaken to quantify the
cumulative levels of carbon sequestered through
mangroves planted by Aramco alongside

both coasts of Saudi Arabia over a number of
decades. The assessment recorded an average
carbon stock of around 340,000 tCO,e (between
276,000 tCO,e and 410,000 tCO,e.)

In line with the Saudi Green Initiative, which has
a target to plant 10 billion trees and increase the
percentage of protected areas in Saudi Arabia
to more than 30%, Aramco plans to invest in
planting 31 million mangroves in the Kingdom
by 2025, 300 million in Saudi Arabia by 2035,
with a further and 350 million mangroves
outside Saudi Arabia by the same date.

Carbon markets

Putting a price on carbon would be a key
enabler for motivating investment in emerging
technologies that are currently not cost-effective.
Aramco favors and supports efficient and
cost-effective ways to set a carbon price. We
believe market mechanisms that address climate

1. For more information on The Blue Carbon Initiative methodology.

What are we doing?

Captura

Captura, one of the latest startups invested in by Aramco Ventures, is
exploring and locking to scale-up the potential for low-cost atmospheric
carbon removal by leveraging the world’s largest natural CO, absorber
— the ocean. With minimal impacts on the environment and using only
renewable electricity and ocean water as inputs, its patented
electrodialysis process generates a stream of pure CO, that can then be

sequestered or utilized to make other low carbon products.

cost-effective approach to reducing atmospheric CO... It can also be
integrated with desalination infrastructure, which is already deployed
at large-scale in Saudi Arabia.

Na

Captura’s ocean carbon capture represents an innovative and potentially

change and sustainable development, and take
the economic circumstances of developing
countries into account, offer a good balance
between driving emissions reductions and
supporting economic growth.

To be effective, any framework or market-based
mechanism should cover all emitting sectors and
all types of GHG emissions, recognize carbon
intensity differentiation, equity, and revenue
neutrality, as well as transferability of potential
credits.

Voluntary markets enable private investors,
governments, non-governmental organizations,
and businesses to purchase carbon credits to
offset their emissions.

The Regional Voluntary Carbon Market

In 2022, Aramco signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with Saudi Arabia’s Public
Investment Fund to support the establishment
of the Regional Voluntary Carbon Market in
Riyadh and participated in its inaugural auction,
where 1.4 million carbon credits were sold, of
which 650,000 were purchased by Aramco.

39

MGlAdIAO

NOILISNW4L ADYANA SHL
GNV JDNVHD SILVA

ALNJINdO19A40 31d04d
ONY SNOILVdadO 44VS

DNIZIAINIA

LOVdIAI TWLNJWNOUIANA

ANTVA TVLIIDOS
DNIMOYD

JDNVNYAAOD

Vvivd

Aramco Sustainability Report 2022

Differentiate | Sustain

The credits sourced through the auction are
accredited by reputable international standards
bodies compliant with globally accepted
offsetting schemes (CORSIA) and originate
from a variety of carbon reducing projects in
developing countries between 2018 and 2020.

Use of carbon offsets

Aramco is building a portfolio of carbon offsets
that is either generated through the projects it
invests in, or purchased in the voluntary carbon
markets. These carbon offsets will be used to
offset the Company's residual emissions once
we establish our annual targets.

Aramco is actively engaging in the development

of global carbon markets through its memberships
of the International Emission Trading Association
and OGCI.

Additionally, through Aramco Venture’s
Sustainability Fund, we are planning to invest

in new technologies promoting the development
of global voluntary carbon markets.

Leveraging technology

We have a track record of innovation and
technology development and we recognize
that a successful energy transition requires
collaboration with a wide range of business and
technology partners to develop the solutions
needed:

» As the energy transition gathers pace, Aramco
is leveraging technology and innovation
toward a low carbon future and driving
sustainable energy solutions across our
business and the industries we supply; and

» We are innovating toward more sustainable
solutions to help drive our positive impact on
society and boost the quality of life for future
generations.

Total R&D spend'
($ million)

L178

1. Total Group R&D including SABIC.
2. Includes direct R&D program costs plus estimated overheads.
3. Does not include SABIC R&D expenses.

2020) ery
20) Ty
2 TTT

40

Diversify | Enable

What are we doing?

Embracing data-driven decision making:
Aramco’s Support for the Archie Initiative

As part of our ongoing efforts to drive sustainability and transparency in
the energy sector, we support the Archie Initiative, an innovative scientific
project aimed at enhancing GHG emissions estimations and fostering
transparency within the global energy supply chain.

The Initiative brings together leading researchers, analysts, energy
producers and thought leaders from academia and industry to
collaborate and provide data on the carbon intensities of various energy
sources, enabling better-informed decision-making.

The Initiative utilizes widely accepted life cycle analysis methods to enable
a scientifically robust assessment and quantification of GHG emissions
from various stages of the energy supply chain worldwide.

We believe our partnership can contribute to a more data-driven energy
sector, promoting more sustainable and responsible energy choices for
the benefit of shareholders, customers, and the global community.

96

countries

oil fields analyzed global production

In 2022, our sustainability-related R&D was $435 million?, which equated to
59% {an increase of 7% from 2021) of total 2022 R&D spend of $737 million?.
Our R&D spend encompassed sustainability focused solutions to improve our
business and energy efficiency, lower our carbon footprint and enhance
company circularity, as well as supporting the global energy transition
towards a lower carbon emissions future.

2021 spend 2022 spend
R&D focus areas ($ million) ($ million)
ccs 24,7 41.5
Renewable energy 9.3 6.4
Energy efficiency 55.9 64.8
Waste management and recycling 31.1 32.3
Water management 29.7 32.2
Gas treatment 21.4 40.5
Low carbon hydrogen 25.6 26.4
Sustainable mobility 94.0 136.6
Crude to chemicals 78 30.3
Non-metallic applications 15.5 24.2
Total R&D for sustainability technologies”? 315 435
Total Aramco R&D?? 607 737
% of sustainability-related R&D
out of Aramco R&D spend?? 52% 59%

Examples of ongoing R&D initiatives include:

Innovative technologies and processes for
the utilization of CO, in various applications
to deliver alternative sequestration pathways;

Cost-competitive technology for large-scale
CO, capture from air for reusing it for e-fuels
or storage;

New technologies that optimize/aid in the
integration of alternate energies into upstream
operations, reducing emissions associated with
power consumption;

Cost-effective and efficient onsite hydrogen
and electricity generation systems to
provide low carbon hydrogen and electricity
for transport;

With leading engine manufacturers,
developing and demonstrating efficiency
- and therefore reduced emissions — in
internal combustion engines utilizing CO,,
and emissions solutions;

Converting crude oil directly to chemicals to
optimize or eliminate several energy intensive
industrial processes;

In plastics, develop technologies and processes
to reduce material and chemical consumption,
and increase recycling; and

Reduce emissions associated with water
processing and disposal/re-injection through
reduced water production, recycling and reuse.

10,000+

Input data points

167

Aramco facilities

2,730

Facilities in-Kingdom

100

Refineries out-of-Kingdom

IR 4.0 — the Global Lighthouse Network

Three of our larger facilities have been accredited
by the Global Lighthouse Network, a group of
industrial sites that the World Economic Forum
has identified as pace-setting in implementing
Fourth Industrial Revolution technology at scale.

The latest addition to the network is our Abqaiq
Plant, the largest crude stabilization plant in the
world. It joins Khurais Producing facility and our
‘Uthmaniyah gas plant. Aramco is the only major
energy firm represented — a testament to our
commitment to IR 4.0 technologies and to the
scale of our ongoing digital transformation.

Aramco’s digital transformation has affected
almost every aspect of our Abqaiq Plant’s
operations, with three key changes:

First, the use of robots and drones equipped
with cameras, thermal imagers, and gas
detectors reducing reliance on in-person checks.

Second, the introduction of machine learning
and Al powered algorithms has enabled a
continuous and proactive digital adjustment
of the oil stabilization process — leading to a
4.5% increase in energy efficiency since 2019,
as well as a reduction in CO, emissions.

Third, the use of data analytics and predictive
modeling has enabled our engineers to
anticipate potential disruptions more effectively.

S) Real-time data
acquisition from
well to wheel

‘S) Online monitoring
and optimization
of the Company’s
facilities from
source to sink

Carbon
footprint solutions

41
