2023 climate change resilience report

in this report
chairman’s letter........................................................................... 2
view from the lead director....................................................... 3
highlights........................................................................................ 4

executive summary
delivering long-term value in a lower carbon future ......... 5

section 1: governance framework
continuing strong oversight...................................................... 6

section 2: risk management
assessing and managing transition
and physical risks ........................................................................ 12

section 3: strategy
positioning for higher returns, lower carbon .................... 22

section 4: portfolio
growing a competitive advantage ........................................ 37

section 5: performance and policy
measuring and advocating for what matters ................... 50

section 6: metrics
aligning to TCFD, SASB and others ...................................... 65

section 7: about this report
promoting transparent reporting ......................................... 82

Original release October 2023; updates March 2024.
35: updated IEA carbon intensity data; 38: updated Chevron’s production
percentage; 43: updated exhibit; 48: updated patent number; 53: added
E-liability; 60: added California mandatory reporting; 71–76: updated data
tables and footnotes

advancing
energy progress
at chevron, we believe that the future of energy is
lower carbon and that human ingenuity and the power
of innovation can solve any challenge

Photo: Anchor major capital project hull arriving to Kiewit in Ingleside,
Texas. Our U.S. Gulf of Mexico facilities are some of the lowest carbon
intensity‑producing assets in the world.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
1

chairman’s letter

“the strengths we have today are
important to innovating and scaling the
solutions of tomorrow”

We all have a stake in a reliable and affordable energy system and
a lower carbon future. This belief drives Chevron’s lower carbon
ambitions and the actions we take to advance them, which are
detailed in this report.
Our strategy is clear: Leverage our strengths to safely deliver lower
carbon energy to a growing world. Our greatest strengths are
our assets, the capabilities of our people and technology, and our
customers. We’re building on these strengths to create value for
our stockholders and our stakeholders in three ways.
First, we aim to lead in lower carbon intensity oil, products
and natural gas, which are expected to be part of the global
energy mix for the foreseeable future. While there are many
potential pathways to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement,
all include the continued use of oil and gas, even in rapid
decarbonization scenarios.
It’s within this context that we strive to be among the most efficient
and responsible producers of lower carbon energy.
To drive down the carbon intensity of our operations, we are
high-grading our portfolio, improving operations and using
marginal abatement cost analysis to drive the most reduction from
each dollar spent. Examples of progress include our deepwater
U.S. Gulf of Mexico operations, which produce some of the world’s
lowest carbon intensity oil and gas, and our methane intensity
performance in the Permian Basin, which was in the top quartile
of oil and gas producers in 2021.
Second, we’re helping to reduce the carbon emissions of
major industries and hard-to-abate sectors by advancing new
products and solutions, including renewable fuels, carbon capture
and offsets, hydrogen, and other emerging technologies, such
as geothermal.

Renewable fuels provide a promising path to reducing the carbon
intensity of heavy transportation, including trucking, aviation
and shipping, by allowing customers to use existing equipment.
With the planned completion of the expansion of the Geismar
biorefinery in 2024, our overall renewable fuels capacity is
expected to increase by 30%.
We also continue to advance carbon capture, utilization
and storage, another technology critical to advancing a lower
carbon future. Through a joint venture with Talos Energy and
Equinor, our Texas Bayou Bend project is positioned to be one of
the largest carbon storage projects in the United States. In early
2023, the project was expanded to cover nearly 140,000 acres
of geological formation.
Finally, we believe measurable outcomes are important to
transparency and use metrics to track our progress. Our portfolio
carbon intensity metric measures the full value chain carbon
intensity of our entire business.
Many solutions will be needed to build the lower carbon energy
system of the future. The strengths we have today – experience,
expertise, reach and partnerships – are important to innovating
and scaling the solutions of tomorrow.
We look ahead with optimism and remain confident in the power
of human ingenuity to deliver progress.
Thank you,

Michael K. Wirth
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
2

view from the lead director
dr. wanda austin

“innovative solutions are
needed to ensure energy is lower carbon,
affordable and reliable”

how does the Board of Directors oversee
climate-related risks?
Directors provide oversight and advice for navigating the evolving
landscape and furthering Chevron’s strategy to leverage its
strengths to safely deliver lower carbon energy to a growing world.
The Board has deep expertise and broad experience across many
disciplines. The Board’s four standing committees help our Board
fulfill its oversight responsibilities related to climate issues. For
example, the Public Policy and Sustainability Committee assists
the Board in identifying, monitoring and evaluating potential
implications of climate-related policies and trends that affect
Chevron’s businesses and performance.
how does the Board bring in new ideas?
The Board receives regular briefings from internal and
independent external subject matter experts and considers
broad perspectives on climate change-related matters. In four
of the past five years, the Board participated in offsite strategy
sessions that included presentations by third-party experts on
issues related to climate change and the energy transition, such
as policies, regulations, technology and marketplace evolution.
Fostering long-term and broad-based perspectives are also
important Chevron objectives. The Board engages extensively
with external stakeholders, including stockholders, as an essential
part of advancing the company’s environmental goals. Our
Directors’ regular participation in these dialogues enhances the
Board’s effectiveness.

how is the role of technology evolving?
Technology will play a major role in shaping the energy
mix in both the near- and long-term future. Innovative solutions
are needed to ensure energy is lower carbon, affordable and
reliable. These solutions should consider lifecycle emissions and
be cost-effective and scalable. Although there is great focus on
electrification, the world must look to many different solutions
because reducing emissions in essential industries like air
travel, shipping and heavy industry cannot be achieved through
electrification alone. Chevron has a strategy that aims to advance
lower carbon technologies that can be developed and deployed on
the scale needed for meaningful carbon reduction in hard-to-abate
sectors, including its own.
what are your views on the path and pace
of the energy transition?
Achieving a successful energy system of the future requires three
things: First, it must deliver solutions that meet customer needs,
balancing affordability, reliability and lower carbon; second, given
the scale of the energy system, these solutions must be scalable
to be meaningful; third, once a solution works and is scalable, the
pace of transition can accelerate.
Chevron’s assets, the capabilities of its people and technology,
and customers are distinct advantages in helping to meet the
world’s energy and climate goals. I’m optimistic about the progress
Chevron is making, and I believe Chevron will play a major role in
shaping the energy system of the future.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
3

advancing energy progress
chevron’s strategy is to leverage our strengths to
safely deliver lower carbon energy to a growing world
Our objective is to safely deliver higher returns, lower carbon and superior stockholder value in any business
environment. Adopting intensity metrics provides Chevron the flexibility to grow our upstream and downstream
businesses while aiming to become an increasingly carbon-efficient operator. We are investing to grow our
traditional oil and gas business, lower the carbon intensity of our operations and grow new lower carbon businesses
in renewable fuels, carbon capture and offsets, hydrogen, and other emerging technologies.

lowering the carbon intensity of our operations
2028 targets
(pages 66–70)

71 g CO₂e/MJ

24 kg CO₂e/boe

24 kg CO₂e/boe

36 kg CO2e/boe

portfolio carbon intensity
(Scope 1, 2 and 3) by 2028

gas carbon intensity
(Scope 1 and 2) by 2028

oil carbon intensity
(Scope 1 and 2) by 2028

refining carbon intensity
(Scope 1 and 2) by 2028

2030 targets
(pages 45–48)

100 mbd

renewable fuels
production capacity

25 mmtpa

offsets business
and CCUS

planned capital allocation
(pages 39, 45–49)

$8.0

$2.0

in lower carbon
investments by 2028

in carbon reduction
projects by 2028

billion

150 mtpa

hydrogen equity
production capacity
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
4

billion

executive summary
At Chevron, we believe the future of energy is lower carbon, and we
support the global ambitions of the Paris Agreement. This report
builds on our previous five editions and has updates throughout as
we outline our governance, risk management, strategy, portfolio,
performance and policy, and metrics.

board and management oversight
Given the nature of climate change and its relevance to our
business, the entire Board of Directors addresses climate changerelated issues, with the Board’s committees assisting the Board
by focusing on climate issues related to their respective functions.
The Board has four standing committees: Public Policy and
Sustainability; Audit; Board Nominating and Governance; and
Management Compensation. At the executive level, we manage
potential climate change-related risks and energy transition
opportunities through the Enterprise Leadership Team and
the Global Issues Committee, each of which meets regularly
throughout the year.

risk assessment and management
We face a broad array of climate-related risks, including physical,
legal, policy, technology, market and reputational risks. We
operationalize an enterprisewide process to assess major risks
to the company and seek to apply appropriate mitigations and
safeguards. As part of this process, we conduct an annual risk
review with executive leadership and the Board of Directors and
assess our risks, safeguards and mitigations. As Chevron aims to
safely deliver higher returns and lower carbon in a transitioning
world, we continue to place a high priority on the safety and
health of our workforce and on the protection of communities,
the environment and our assets.

fuels will remain an important part of the energy system for years
to come and that the energy mix will increasingly include lower
carbon sources. As part of our strategic planning process, we
use models and analysis to forecast demand, energy mix, supply,
commodity pricing and carbon prices. This includes assumptions
about future policy, such as those that may be implemented in
support of the Paris Agreement’s goal of “holding the increase in
the global average temperature to well below 2° C above preindustrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1.5° C above pre-industrial levels.”
We believe that our asset mix and actions in new energies enable
us to be flexible in response to potential changes in supply
and demand.

performance and policy
In 2022, more than 50% of our equity (i.e., participating share
of emissions both from facilities that Chevron operates and
from our nonoperated joint ventures) direct emissions were in
regions with existing or developing carbon-pricing policies. In this
environment, and into a future likely to include additional lower
carbon policies, we seek to find solutions that are good for society
and good for investors.
To achieve society’s goals most effectively, markets should be
empowered to incentivize the most carbon-efficient producers
and enabled through transparent performance reporting.
We continue to help develop standardized methodologies for
carbon data that are calculated in a consistent, reliable, transparent
way and are comparable across sectors and firms of all sizes to
enable progress toward a lower carbon future.

success in a lower carbon future
higher returns, lower carbon
Our objective is to safely deliver higher returns, lower carbon and
superior stockholder value in any business environment. Chevron’s
strategic and business planning processes bring together the
company’s views on long-term energy market fundamentals to
guide decision making by executives and to facilitate oversight
by the Board of Directors. The world’s energy demands are
greater now than at any time in human history. Chevron has a
long history of producing oil, gas and other products that enable
human progress, which we proudly continue today as we pursue
the energy future. Many published outlooks conclude that fossil

We aim to grow our traditional oil and gas business, lower the
carbon intensity of our operations and grow new lower carbon
businesses in renewable fuels, carbon capture and offsets,
hydrogen, and other emerging technologies.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
5

section 1

governance
framework
1.1 board oversight ......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 7
1.2 executive management of climate risks ............................................................................................................................................................ 11
1.3 organizational capability on energy transition ................................................................................................................................................11

Photo: In 2022, Lead Director Dr. Wanda Austin met with stakeholders and employees
at Chevron operations in the Eastern Mediterranean and visited the Leviathan offshore
platform. The Board of Directors’ approach to governance and oversight is informed
by feedback and engagements from our stakeholders.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
6

section 1: governance framework
board and management oversight
Our climate-related governance is designed to manage
potential climate change-related risks and energy transition
opportunities. Board oversight, executive management and
organizational capability are foundational elements to our
disciplined approach.

1.1 board oversight
Chevron’s Board of Directors oversees the company’s strategy and
risk management, both of which include climate change issues. Our
governance structure gives the Board multiple avenues to oversee
risks and opportunities, including those related to climate change.
The full Board annually reviews the company’s strategy,
including long-term energy outlooks and signposts on key trends.
The Board has access to education and training on climate-related
materials and to Chevron’s internal subject matter experts.
The Board also regularly receives briefings on climate-related
issues, including policies, regulations, technology and adaptation.
The Board annually reviews Chevron’s Enterprise Risk Management
(ERM) process, which assists the Board and executive leadership in
overseeing key strategic risks for the company. Climate change is
addressed in a comprehensive manner in the ERM process
(see page 13).
The full Board periodically meets with external experts to
hear their perspectives on climate change and the energy
transition. Accessing external experts who have varying
viewpoints on the speed and scale of the energy transition
may enable the Board to consider a range of risks and
opportunities arising from climate change.

Given the nature of climate change and its relevance to our
business, the entire Board addresses climate change-related
issues, with the Board’s committees assisting the Board by
focusing on climate issues related to their respective functions.
The Board has four standing committees: Public Policy and
Sustainability; Audit; Board Nominating and Governance; and
Management Compensation (Exhibit 1). Each Board committee
includes only independent Directors, and each is chaired by an
independent Director. Each committee has access to management,
company information and independent advisors. In 2020 and 2021,
the Board reviewed its governance of climate change-related risks
and energy transition opportunities with the aim of leveraging
the purview of the four standing committees and more clearly
defining how each committee assists the Board with its oversight
responsibilities. As a result, the Board amended the charter of
each of the four standing committees to clearly articulate each
committee’s responsibility in assisting the Board in its oversight
related to climate issues. Specifically, the Public Policy and
Sustainability Committee’s charter was enhanced to underscore its
role in assisting the Board’s oversight of potential climate changerelated risks and energy transition opportunities.

board engagement
The Board’s approach to governance and oversight is informed
by feedback from stakeholders. Members of the Board periodically engage stakeholders to discuss issues like climate change
and to convey Chevron’s approach to the energy transition.
The viewpoints they hear on energy markets, geopolitics and
technology trends enable the Board to effectively deploy our
capital and human talent to achieve our higher returns, lower
carbon objective.
Chevron’s actions are directly informed by engaging with
our stockholders. In 2022, Chevron had over 90 one-on-one
environmental-, social- and governance-focused meetings with
stockholders representing approximately 50% of outstanding
common stock. Of these engagements, members of the Board
participated in environmental-, social- and governance-focused
meetings with stockholders representing approximately 28% of
outstanding common stock.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
7

Exhibit 1. Chevron’s governance structure relevant to potential climate change-related risk
and energy transition opportunity oversight
investors

board of directors*

Board-level committees composed
of non-employee directors

audit committee (AC)

Assists the Board in
overseeing accounting
and financial reporting
processes, including:
• Internal controls over
financial reporting
• Relationship with
independent auditor
• Implementation and
effectiveness of
compliance programs
•F
 inancial risk management
•C
 ybersecurity risks
as they relate to financial
risk exposures
• Sustainability and climate
change risks as they relate
to financial risk exposures
• Operational Excellence
audit and assurance

board nominating and
governance committee (BNGC)

management compensation
committee (MCC)

public policy and sustainability
committee (PPSC)

Assists the Board in
overseeing governance
practices and processes,
including:
• Board succession planning
• Board skills, experiences
and qualifications
• Stockholder engagement
program (in conjunction
with PPSC)
• Board, Committee and
Director evaluation process

Assists the Board in
overseeing compensation
programs and practices,
including:
• E xecutive retention and
diversity strategies
and supporting processes
• Compensation program
design and goals
• Alignment of compensation
with stockholders’ interests,
including those related
to sustainability and
climate change risks and
opportunities

Assists the Board in
overseeing policy issues
and potential risks in areas
such as:
• Environmental matters,
including those related
to sustainability and
climate change
• Legislative and regulatory
initiatives
• Community relations
• Political contributions and
lobbying
• Chevron’s global reputation
• Stockholder engagement
program (in conjunction
with BNGC)

Committees of executive officers
operating under direction of the Board

executive committee† (EC)

enterprise leadership team†
(ELT)

* Chaired by Chairman of the Board
† Chaired by Chief Executive Officer

global issues committee
(GIC)

Manages the composition, resource
allocation and strategic direction of
Chevron’s portfolio in the following areas:
•O
 perational Excellence
• Performance improvement
• Energy transition
• Enterprise Risk Management process
• Market and price forecasts

Oversees management of sustainability
issues and practices, including:
• Energy transition
• Lobbying and trade association activity
• E SG reporting
• Revenue and tax transparency
• Human capital management
• Human rights

Receives briefings on these topics from
internal subject matter experts and consults
with outside experts to discuss energy
transition and climate change issues.

Receives regular updates on these issues
from internal subject matter experts in
advance of quarterly meetings.

Additionally, events may be handled via ad hoc, cross-functional Crisis Management and Issue Management
teams, which report regularly to members of the ELT, and if appropriate, provide updates to the Board.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
8

1.1.1 Public Policy and Sustainability Committee (PPSC)
The PPSC assists the Board in identifying, monitoring and
evaluating potential climate risks, policies and trends that affect
Chevron’s activities and performance. The PPSC discusses
Chevron’s progress in addressing sustainability and climate change
matters such as the energy transition, establishment of climaterelated goals and voluntary reporting of environmental matters.
The PPSC is briefed on emerging or ongoing issues related to
capital markets, government policies and societal trends that
could significantly impact Chevron’s enterprise objectives. The
PPSC reviews Chevron’s political activities, including how direct
and indirect lobbying on climate issues supports Chevron’s climate
strategy and reflects on the company’s reputation. In conjunction
with the Board Nominating and Governance Committee, the
PPSC reviews climate-related proxy proposals and makes
recommendations to the Board on responses to such proposals.

PPSC oversight on
climate lobbying
Lobbying is an important way for Chevron to participate in
the political process. Chevron engages in direct and indirect
lobbying. Direct lobbying is conducted by our employees and
contract lobbyists. Related activities that support our employees
and contractors are referred to as “indirect” lobbying activities
and include research and analysis related to issues and pending
legislation. Indirect activities are performed by our employees as
well as the trade associations of which we are a member.
Both lobbying and corporate political contributions are managed
internally with oversight by Chevron’s corporate compliance and
internal audit teams and the Board of Directors.
The PPSC assists the Board in overseeing political activities
and providing effective responses to stockholder concerns
regarding such activities. The PPSC annually reviews the
policies, procedures and expenditures related to the company’s
political contributions and lobbying to assess the value of these
activities and ensure alignment with Chevron’s positions, interests and trade-offs. The PPSC provides guidance on Chevron’s
political activities to the vice president of Corporate Affairs.
For more information on our lobbying practices, see our
lobbying and trade association webpage
chevron.co/lobbyingandtrade.

1.1.2 Audit Committee (AC)
The AC reviews the company’s policies with respect to risk
assessment and risk management and Chevron’s major financial
risk exposures, including sustainability and climate change risks.
These risks are discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of the
company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K.1 The AC selects and
engages the company’s independent auditor and assists the Board
in overseeing the audit of the company’s financial statements.
1.1.3 Management Compensation Committee (MCC)
The MCC considers the relative alignment of the company’s
compensation policies and practices with investors’ interests,
including those related to sustainability, climate change risks and
energy transition opportunities. The MCC assesses and approves
the incorporation of greenhouse gas-related performance
measures into the scorecard that affects the compensation of
management and most other employees.
1.1.4 Board Nominating and Governance Committee (BNGC)
The BNGC identifies and recommends prospective Directors
with the goal of maintaining a Board composition appropriate to
overseeing the wide-ranging risks that affect the company. The
BNGC regularly reviews the appropriate skills and qualifications
of Directors in the context of the current composition of the
Board, the strategy of the company and the long-term interests
of investors. The BNGC also regularly reviews the list of skills
and qualifications desired for Board composition under the
Corporate Governance Guidelines and, in 2021, added “experience
leading business transformation” in light of the energy transition.
Among the other collective skills and qualifications desired for an
appropriate Board composition are experience and knowledge
of environmental (including climate issues), governmental,
regulatory, legal, public policy, financial, global business,
international affairs and technology issues.
Chevron’s Directors have a diverse set of skills, experience and
expertise to enable the Board to effectively oversee potential
climate change-related risks and energy transition opportunities
for the company. Several independent Directors bring specific
environmental and policy skills and qualifications to the Board.
Our Directors’ experience comes from academic, government and
business sectors. These diverse perspectives enable the Board to
challenge itself and company management on climate changerelated risks and energy transition opportunities.
The Board periodically reassesses Chevron’s governance
structure and the skills, experience and expertise of the Board.
Such assessment helps Chevron maintain an effective framework
for managing the company’s performance and the risks to
our business.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
9

board of directors

highly engaged, diverse board with relevant skills and qualifications

Michael K. Wirth, Chairman and CEO

Wanda M. Austin, Lead Director

John B. Frank
Vice Chairman,
Oaktree Capital Group, LLC (1)

Former Vice Chairman of the Board
and Executive Vice President of
Midstream & Development, Chevron

Retired President and CEO,
The Aerospace Corporation (2, 3)

Alice P. Gast
Retired President and Professor
Emeritus of Chemical Engineering,
Imperial College London (2, 4)

Enrique Hernandez, Jr.
Executive Chairman,
Inter-Con Security Systems, Inc. (3, 4)

Marillyn A. Hewson
Retired Chairman, CEO and President,
Lockheed Martin Corporation (1)

Jon M. Huntsman Jr.
Former Governor of Utah;
U.S. Ambassador to Russia, China
and Singapore (3, 4)

Charles W. Moorman
Senior Advisor to Amtrak,
Retired Chairman and CEO,
Norfolk Southern Corporation (2, 3)

Dambisa F. Moyo
Co-Principal,
Versaca Investments (1)

Debra Reed-Klages
Retired Chairman, CEO and President,
Sempra Energy (1)

D. James Umpleby III
Chairman and CEO,
Caterpillar Inc. (2, 4)

Cynthia J. Warner
Former President and CEO,
Renewable Energy Group, Inc. (4)

Skills, Experiences and Expertise:
CEO/Senior Executive/Leader of Significant Operations
Science/Technology/Engineering/Research/Academia
Government/Regulatory/Legal/Public Policy
Finance/Financial Disclosure/Financial Accounting
Global Business/International Affairs
Environmental
Leading Business Transformation
Committees of the Board: (1) Audit: Debra Reed-Klages, Chair (2) Board Nominating and Governance: Wanda M. Austin, Chair
(3) Management Compensation: Charles W. Moorman, Chair (4) Public Policy and Sustainability: Enrique Hernandez, Jr., Chair
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
10

1.2 executive management of climate risks
Under the direction of the Board, Chevron’s Executive Committee
(EC) is composed of executive officers of Chevron and carries out
Board policy in managing the business affairs of the company.
The Enterprise Leadership Team and Global Issues Committee,
described below, are subcommittees of the Executive Committee.
1.2.1 Enterprise Leadership Team (ELT)
The ELT is responsible for managing the composition, resource
allocation and strategic direction of Chevron’s portfolio to
achieve Chevron’s objectives. The ELT focuses on performance
improvement by understanding current performance and business
drivers and assessing the progress and status of key corporate
initiatives, like the development of our New Energies business
lines (see pages 46–49) to evolve our portfolio in light of energy
transition opportunities. The ELT also oversees the ERM process
(see page 13), which includes and addresses climate changerelated risks. The ELT receives briefings from Chevron’s subject
matter experts on topics such as climate change; geopolitical
risk; market conditions; energy transition strategies; peer
activities; performance on and updates to metrics; technology
and innovation; policy; and future energy opportunities. The ELT
reviews market fundamentals for oil, gas, products, carbon and
new energy solutions (see page 24).

1.2.2 Global Issues Committee (GIC)
The GIC, chaired by the Vice Chairman of the Board, oversees the
development of Chevron’s policies and positions related to global
issues that may have a significant impact on Chevron’s business
interests and reputation.

the vice president of chevron strategy
and sustainability also serves as secretary
to the PPSC, helping to connect the
GIC’s work to the PPSC
The GIC receives updates from subject matter experts on an
array of climate change-related issues, such as carbon policy
development around the world; company positions on carbon
policy; political developments; lobbying and trade association
activity; and environmental, social and governance (ESG) reporting
practices. The GIC reviews the public climate change-related
actions of other companies to understand how our peers are
responding to climate change-related risks and energy transition
opportunities. It also oversees our stockholder engagement plan
and reviews feedback from our stockholder engagements. The GIC
is focused on ensuring that our strategy and position are clearly
communicated and that stakeholder feedback and concerns are
carefully considered.

1.3 organizational capability on energy transition
Our people strategy is focused on engaging the full potential of our people
to deliver the future of energy. We will achieve this by building great
leaders, advancing our culture, and strengthening core and emerging skills.
We strive to continually improve execution across all aspects of our
business as the energy system evolves. Our Oil, Products & Gas (OPG)
organization combines upstream, midstream and downstream – the full
value chain – which allows for a more integrated approach to capital allocation, asset class excellence and value chain optimization. For example,
the OPG Lower Carbon organization provides coordination to accelerate
execution of high-impact opportunities and development of future lower
carbon pathways.
Chevron Technology Ventures (CTV) identifies, invests in and integrates
externally developed technologies and business solutions. CTV targets
innovation and transformational technology in areas like carbon capture,

utilization and storage (CCUS); hydrogen; and emerging power
technologies, among others. The Chevron Technical Center develops
and deploys technology enterprisewide, including integrating lower
carbon technology into our operations.
Chevron New Energies is focused on developing new lower carbon
businesses that have the potential to scale. Its focus includes commercialization opportunities in renewable fuels, CCUS and offsets, hydrogen, and
emerging technologies.
Chevron Strategy and Sustainability (CSS) stewards the company’s
long-term strategy by integrating climate change, energy transition and
other sustainability themes into macroeconomic forecasting, supply-anddemand forecasting, price forecasting, portfolio modeling and competitor
intelligence. In 2022, CSS formed a methane reduction team to guide and
implement our enterprise methane strategy.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
11

section 2

risk management
2.1 physical risks ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 13
2.2 transition risks ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 14

Photo: Workers inspecting pipe at CO₂ injection well. Chevron Australia’s Gorgon
liquefied natural gas facility incorporates one of the world’s largest integrated carbon
capture and storage projects.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
12

section 2: risk management
2.1 physical risks

enterprise risk management
Chevron employs risk management processes for identifying,
assessing and managing the risks to our business, including
potential climate change-related risks.
Our ERM process provides corporate oversight for assessing
major risks to the company and the safeguards and mitigations
that are put in place. As part of the annual ERM process, the
ELT reviews risk categories that pertain to external stakeholders,
geopolitical and legislative issues, organizational capability,
and skilled personnel, among others, and their potential consequences, financial and otherwise. An executive from the ELT
owns each risk category, directs a team to identify, safeguard
and mitigate enterprise risks, and reports the findings to the ELT.
Following endorsement by the ELT, the annual ERM assessment
is reviewed by the Board of Directors. Potential climate changerelated risks are integrated into multiple ERM categories.
Our management of risk is further aided by other systems and
processes such as our Operational Excellence Management
System (OEMS).
For more information on OEMS and focus area examples, see our
2022 Corporate Sustainability Report.

Climate disclosure frameworks generally identify two main areas of
corporate climate risk: physical risks and transition risks.* Physical
risks include potential physical impacts driven by both acute
events and long-term shifts in climate patterns. Transition risks
include the potential risks to a company arising from the transition
to a lower carbon energy system, such as litigation, technology
advancements and changes in policy, supply and demand, and
stakeholder perceptions.

According to the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report, the physical risks of climate
change are varied and widespread. As disclosed on page 21 of
the company’s 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K, the company’s
operations are subject to disruption from natural or human causes
beyond its control, including physical risks from hurricanes,
severe storms, floods, heat waves, other forms of severe weather,
wildfires, ambient temperature increases, sea level rise, fires and
earthquakes, some of which may be impacted by climate change
and any of which could result in suspension of operations or harm
to people or the natural environment.
Our operations have practices in place to help manage
risks associated with the impacts of ambient conditions and
extreme weather events, regardless of any connection to
anthropogenic climate change. These long-standing practices
are also applied to address possible effects of climate change
and to maintain the resilience of our infrastructure. For example,
Chevron’s Metocean Design and Operating Conditions guideline
provides guidance for the physical parameters to be used in
the design, construction and operation of offshore and coastal
facilities, including those on land that may be threatened by
coastal inundation due to storm surges. Chevron and a third party
developed screening tools to identify potential physical risks
at our assets globally as part of the Physical Risk from Climate
Change procedure, formerly Climate Assess. The procedure is
captured within the corporate OEMS, as part of the Environment
Risk Management Process, and is for use in identifying, assessing,
managing and mitigating the potential physical impacts of climate
change to Chevron activities, including existing operations,
operational changes, projects and new opportunities.
With worldwide operations subject to diverse microclimates and
weather phenomena, we stay prepared for the possibility of natural
disasters. Based on risk evaluations and business impact analysis,
business units develop and implement a business continuity plan
to provide continuous availability – or prompt recovery – of critical
business processes, resources and facility operations. Our business
units work with local communities and emergency response teams
to develop site-specific plans in the event of any disruption. The
plans and processes are regularly reviewed and tested to promote
business continuity.

* Two such frameworks are CalPERS/Wellington Management, Physical Risks of Climate Change
(P-ROCC), which can be accessed at wellington.com/en/wellington-news/physical-risks-ofclimate-change-p-rocc, and the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD),
Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, which can be accessed
at assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/10/FINAL-2017-TCFD-Report-11052018.pdf.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
13

2.2 transition risks
Our ERM process encompasses risks typically identified as climaterelated transition risks, including policy, technology, market,
legal and reputational risks. Risks that could materially impact
our operations and financial condition are discussed in the “Risk
Factors” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2.2.1 Policy risks
Policies addressing climate-related issues are evolving (see
pages 54–64). The direct effects, as well as second- and thirdorder effects, of potential policy changes will depend on the type
and timing of such changes. As disclosed on pages 22–24 of the
company’s 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K, significant changes
in the regulatory environment, including those driven by climaterelated issues, could affect our operations.
For example, legislation, regulation and other government actions
related to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and climate
change could continue to increase Chevron’s operational costs and
reduce demand for Chevron’s hydrocarbon and other products.
Climate-related issues are integrated into the company’s strategy
and planning, capital investment reviews, and risk management
tools and processes, where applicable (see page 24). They are
also factored into the company’s long-range supply, demand and
energy price forecasts (see page 36).
2.2.2 Technology risks
Development and deployment of innovations and emerging
technologies in pursuit of a lower carbon economy may disrupt or
displace portions of the current economic system. As disclosed
on page 20 of the company’s 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K,
technology advancements could affect the price of crude oil.
The Chevron Technology Center (CTC) supports Chevron’s
businesses through research, technology and capability
development. The CTC also helps bridge the gap between
business unit needs and emerging technology solutions
developed externally to the company (see pages 26–28, 49).
Chevron established the Chevron Future Energy Fund in 2018
with a commitment of $100 million and a follow-up Future
Energy Fund II in 2021 with a commitment of $300 million to
invest in breakthrough technologies that could help advance
the energy transition.

2.2.3 Market risks
The potential impacts of climate change on markets are complex
and uncertain. As disclosed on page 20 of the company’s 2022
Annual Report on Form 10-K, Chevron is primarily in a commodities
business that has a history of price volatility. Potential consumer
use of substitutes to Chevron’s products that may be developed in
the future may impact our business.
We are focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet and
preserving prudent liquidity levels. Our policies and controls
provide centralized governance over key enterprise processes,
including banking, liquidity management, foreign exchange,
credit risk, financing, and climate change-related risks and energy
transition opportunities (see page 24).

we continue to place a high
priority on the safety and health
of our workforce and on the
protection of communities,
the environment and our assets
Guided by The Chevron Way, we have embedded and longstanding processes that are designed to grow our workforce
capabilities and engage with stakeholders to manage potential
impacts in the communities where we operate. We aim to:
• Employ risk management processes to evaluate facility-,
activity- and product-related risks across the lifecycle of the
business, from planning and construction through operation
and decommissioning.
• Empower our people through programs that promote their
health, well-being and development, including training and
development for employees to help them achieve their full
potential and to meet the needs of the evolving business.
• Cultivate innovative collaboration in the communities
where we operate to support robust social investment
programs, including investing in STEM education and
programs that support small and diverse businesses and
supporting workforce development programs.
• Involve communities and other stakeholders in meaningful
discussions and planning where there may be asset retirement
or divestiture.
For more information on activities regarding employees and
communities, see our 2022 Corporate Sustainability Report.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
14

2.2.4 Legal risks
In recent years, a variety of plaintiffs have brought legal claims
against various defendants alleging climate-related losses and
damages. As disclosed on page 24 of the company’s 2022 Annual
Report on Form 10-K, increasing attention to climate change may
result in additional government investigations and private litigation
against Chevron.
We have highly capable legal staff and associated safeguards
through all levels of the enterprise to identify, evaluate and
actively address legal risks. Our legal experts review and report on
emerging issues and trends that could impact the company. They
aim to provide systematic reviews of climate-related matters and
timely analysis and advice for the management of identified risks.
2.2.5 Reputational risks
As disclosed on pages 24–25 of the company’s 2022 Annual Report
on Form 10-K, increasing attention to ESG matters, including those
related to climate change, may impact our business. Organizations
that provide information to investors on corporate governance and
related matters have developed ratings processes for evaluating
companies on their approach to ESG matters. Such ratings are

used by some investors to inform their investment and voting
decisions. Also, some stakeholders, including but not limited to
sovereign wealth, pension and endowment funds, have been
promoting divestment of fossil fuel equities and urging lenders
to limit funding to companies engaged in the extraction of fossil
fuel reserves. Unfavorable ESG ratings and investment community
divestment initiatives may lead to increased negative investor
sentiment toward Chevron and our industry and to the diversion of
investment to other industries.
Our GIC actively stewards our reputation by working toward
alignment of key corporate policies, practices and public positions
related to climate change. Refer to Section 1, “Governance
Framework” (see pages 7–11).
The Stakeholder Engagement and Issues Management process
in our OEMS facilitates engagement with local communities
and stakeholders to identify and assess the unique risks for
each business unit’s operations. Potential social, political and
reputational risks are identified, leading to risk management
strategies. We regularly engage with investors and other
stakeholders to receive feedback on climate-related issues.

climate-related litigation
Chevron, along with other investor-owned energy companies
comprising a small subset of the industry, has been named as a
defendant in 25 lawsuits brought by four U.S. states, the District of
Columbia, various county and city governments, and a fishing trade
group. The lawsuits seek to hold the targeted companies financially
responsible for the alleged effects of climate change, seeking billions
of dollars in alleged damages, remediation costs and contingency-fee
payments to private lawyers representing most of the plaintiffs. The
lawsuits’ proponents seek to radically transform modern society.
In the only case that to date has been finally resolved on the merits,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal
of all claims: “To permit this suit to proceed under state law would …
risk upsetting the careful balance that has been struck between the
prevention of global warming … and energy production, economic
growth, foreign policy and national security.” See City of New York
v. Chevron Corp., 993 F.3d 81 (2d Cir. 2021). The court characterized
climate change as a “uniquely international problem of national
concern” that is not apt for adjudication under state law.
In Chevron’s view, the suggestion that a few, investor-owned energy
companies should be held retroactively liable for the cumulative
effects of the phenomena contributing to climate change is legally
and factually baseless. These companies’ collective production meets
only a small fraction of global oil and gas demand and contributes
an even smaller portion of overall GHG emissions. The production
of oil and gas has brought immense economic and security benefits
to billions of people around the world, including the citizens of the
state and local governments filing these lawsuits, which is why it has
long been permitted, promoted and even mandated by governments
around the world. Seeking to impose retroactive liability against a
small group of energy companies disregards the history of how our
complex energy system has developed, as well as national security

and geopolitical imperatives. Granting the putative relief requested in
these lawsuits would neither reduce global demand for oil and gas nor
effectively address climate change. Targeting investor-owned energy
companies while ignoring the much larger production of state-owned
companies and GHG emissions from other sectors of the economy
is arbitrary and opportunistic and would punish companies that are
often the most transparent, innovative and responsible producers of
the energy that is essential to modern life.
Claims that Chevron has improperly concealed superior knowledge
of climate change from the public are false. The potential climate
effects of GHG emissions – including those produced by certain
end users of fossil fuels – have been the subject of extensive study
funded and published by the United States government, among
other national and international bodies, for more than half a century.
This massive body of research has been the subject of widespread
public discussion by prominent scientists, activists and government
officials. Within this broad public debate, policymakers at every level
of government – including government entities that are plaintiffs in
these lawsuits – have made policy decisions to continue the production and use of oil and gas after weighing the costs, benefits and
competing priorities.
Chevron believes that climate change is a global issue that requires
global solutions. We welcome meaningful efforts to address climate
change and look forward to continuing to engage with governments
and stakeholders to develop constructive solutions to help deliver
a lower carbon future. Attempting to use the court system to usurp
the proper role of policymakers, stifle disfavored speech on issues of
public importance, and retroactively punish investor-owned energy
companies for lawful and beneficial activity is not an appropriate or
effective means of accomplishing that objective.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
15

2.2.6 scenario test
stress-testing our portfolio under the IEA NZE scenario

We consider a range of long-term energy-demand scenarios* and commodity prices when evaluating
our portfolio. For longer-term scenarios, we routinely use external views to both inform and challenge
our internal views. This includes scenarios that assume a wide range of energy transition outcomes,
which may include scenarios for which the possibility of occurrence is remote. We analyze these
alternative scenarios representing diverse potential futures to stress-test our portfolio and integrate
lessons learned into our decision making to assess investments and evaluate business risk.
IEA NZE Scenario in context
The International Energy Agency (IEA) Net Zero Emissions by 2050
(NZE) Scenario is one potential path to a 1.5° C scenario. Described
by the IEA as “a pathway to reach net zero emissions by 2050,
not the [emphasis added] pathway,” the scenario was originally
published in 2021, with an update issued in October 2022.
We used the assumptions in the NZE Scenario (2022) to test
the resiliency of our portfolio. The statements that follow in this
section represent projections and assumptions associated with
that scenario test. They are not representative of Chevron’s own
predictions or actual conditions at the present time.
The hypothetical NZE Scenario sets out a pathway to achieve net
zero emissions from the global energy system in 2050. It assumes
a transition based on three fundamental shifts in the global
energy system: massive electrification, unprecedented levels of
energy intensity improvement† and widespread global policy
cooperation. In the scenario, the global economy moves away from
one largely powered by fossil fuels to one powered predominantly
by renewable energy and decreases in oil and gas demand put
downward pressure on prices.
The NZE Scenario has lower oil and gas demand than other
externally developed Paris-aligned scenarios such as the average
C1 pathway, described as warming limited to 1.5° C with no or
limited overshoot, through C4 pathway, described as warming
limited to 2° C (Exhibit 2), of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC).
The NZE Scenario also reflects lower oil and gas prices than other
1.5° C scenarios such as the Network for Greening the Financial
System Net Zero by 2050 Scenario (NGFS Net Zero by 2050
Scenario).² The IEA’s NZE Scenario projects the price of oil drops
to approximately $35 per barrel by 2030 and to less than $25 per

Exhibit 2. IEA NZE Scenario in context: oil and gas demand in
various 2° C or lower external scenarios
(mmboe/d)
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

2022

2026

IPCC scenarios

2030

2034

2038

2042

2046

2050

IEA NZE Scenario (2022)

Sources: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022; IPCC, AR6
Scenario Explorer and Database Hosted by IIASA, data.ene.iiasa.ac.at/ar6/#/downloads.

barrel by 2050 in real terms. This compares with projections for
oil prices greater than $85 per barrel in 2030 and approximately
$110 per barrel in 2050, in real terms, in the NGFS Net Zero by
2050 Scenario.
The 2022 update to the NZE Scenario reflects higher near-term
emissions following the world’s rebound from the COVID-19
pandemic, initial increased use of coal and a faster transition from
gas to renewables in Europe following the Russia-Ukraine military
conflict, and revisions to behavior-based assumptions. Compared
with NZE Scenario forecasted assumptions in 2021, the 2022

* A scenario is a hypothetical construct that uses assumptions and estimates to highlight central elements of a possible future but is not a forecast, prediction or sensitivity analysis.
† The IEA defines energy intensity improvement as the percentage decrease in the ratio of global total energy supply per unit of gross domestic product.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
16

updates result in very little change in overall energy demand or
price. Natural gas demand is the notable exception. Based on the
IEA’s projection of how present-day energy security concerns over
international gas supply could cause a shift away from gas demand
in the coming decade, gas demand is down markedly in favor of
coal and biomass, followed by nuclear and renewable power. The
IEA also specifically calls out the need for policymakers to “do
much more to provide signals on the demand side” to develop
clean energy supply chains and emphasizes that the NZE Scenario
pathway “cannot be achieved without the rapid and large-scale
adoption of measures that limit growth in energy demand.”

IEA NZE Scenario assumptions

The scenario’s assumptions are limited to the energy sector and do
not address natural climate solutions, such as offsets, or impacts to
land-use change that occur in non-energy sectors. The framework
also assumes less use of negative emissions technologies, like
CCUS, than IPCC scenarios.

• Electricity use increases from approximately 20% of final
energy consumption today to over 50% by 2050.

The IEA describes the pathway as “narrow but still achievable,” in
that it “entails very ambitious policies and measures to improve
energy efficiency and reduce energy demand, including through
behavioral change,” and acknowledges that “[t]here are … many
areas where progress is well short of what is envisaged in the
NZE Scenario.” We agree – the scenario and its assumptions are
challenging. The NZE Scenario requires globally coordinated
policy design, strong international cooperation, vast capital
redeployment, nearly quadrupling of renewables and nuclear
capacity additions, accelerated technology deployment, and an
improvement in energy intensity that is two-and-a-half times
higher than the observed trend of the past decade. We see
the NZE Scenario as remote and highly unlikely due to the
immediate and unprecedented action required to transform
the global energy system.

• The oil and gas sector’s share of total primary energy demand
declines from over 50% today to approximately 15% by 2050.

The NZE Scenario results in approximately 15% lower global
primary energy demand in 2050 than in 2021 (Exhibit 3) while
supporting 2 billion more people and a doubling of the global
economy. A selection of the scenario’s assumptions are as follows:
• Global energy investment doubles, increasing from an average
of 2% of annual GDP from 2017 to 2021 to nearly 4% by 2030.
• Universal energy access is achieved globally by 2030.

• Renewables and bioenergy account for over 80% of the
global energy mix by 2050.

• The power generation sector reaches net zero emissions
across all advanced economies by 2035 and net zero emissions
globally by 2040.

Exhibit 3. Total primary energy demand in IEA NZE Scenario
(Exajoules)
10 billion

800
8 billion

600

“there is still a large gap between today’s
ambitions and a 1.5° C stabilization”3
Modeling of long-term scenarios is inherently speculative, given the
wide range of unpredictable variables and externalities that could
affect outcomes through 2050. We do not rely on the NZE Scenario
for our business planning. Nonetheless, we have conducted a
scenario test of the NZE Scenario demand projections, as well as
its oil and gas projections, to stress-test our portfolio.
The IEA does not directly provide all the necessary market details
required to run an NZE Scenario analysis (e.g., regional pricing or
product consumption). Where necessary, we developed additional
assumptions consistent with the NZE Scenario narrative to
estimate the performance of our portfolio.

400

200

0

2021

2030

2040

2050

Population

Oil

Nuclear

Bioenergy

Coal

Natural gas

Hydropower

Other renewables

Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Our Corporate Audit department, which performs the internal
audit function at Chevron, conducted a nonrated assurance review
of the NZE Scenario analysis. The Corporate Audit department
found that the analysis was conducted in accordance with
established internal process and emerging external guidance.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
17

• Battery storage increases 30-fold between 2021 and 2030, with
storage surpassing natural gas as the principal source of system
flexibility by 2035.
• No new cars with internal combustion engines are sold after
2035, and nearly all trucks sold in 2040 and beyond use
electricity or hydrogen.
• By 2050, crude oil prices drop to less than $25 per barrel, in real
terms, and international gas prices drop to $2–$5 per mmbtu,
in real terms.

and $125 billion per year thereafter, in real terms, following
rapid deployment in clean energy technology. The IEA states
that “reducing oil investment to this level would lead to a very
different outcome if done in advance of – or instead of – the huge
scaling up in clean energy spending and consequent reduction in
oil demand that features in this scenario.”
Exhibit 4: IEA NZE Scenario (2022) assumed carbon price

2030

• By 2050, carbon prices rise to $250 per tonne CO₂e in advanced
economies, $200 in China, India, Indonesia, Brazil and South
Africa, and $180 in other emerging-market and developing
economies (Exhibit 4).

advanced economies with net zero pledges*

$140/tonne

• Energy efficiency and changes in consumer behavior drive much
of the emissions reduction (Exhibit 5):

$90/tonne

– Behavior changes include less space heating and air
conditioning, levies on frequent fliers, and policies that
encourage travel by rail and discourage car use in cities
and SUV ownership

$200/tonne

other emerging-market and developing economies

– Approximately 50% of emissions reductions for industry
and buildings result from energy efficiency measures

– Approximately 75% of the projected emissions reductions
related to behavior change stem from measures directly
mandated or influenced by government policies such
as congestion charges, speed limits and high-speed
rail build-out

$250/tonne

emerging-market and developing
economies with net zero pledges†

• By 2050, CCUS accounts for 6.2 gigatonnes (Gt) of CO₂ removals.

– Fuel switching (approximately 65%) and behavior changes
(approximately 20%) drive demand reductions in the
transportation sector

2050

$25/tonne

$180/tonne

* Includes all Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries except Mexico.
† Includes China, India, Indonesia, Brazil and South Africa. Note that as of the
2022 IEA NZE Scenario update, this no longer includes Russia.
Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Exhibit 5. Global CO₂ emissions from energy reductions
in IEA APS and IEA NZE Scenario
(Gigatonnes)
40

oil
• Oil demand: In the NZE Scenario, oil demand drops to
approximately 23 mmbd by 2050, a decrease of approximately 75% from today’s levels. The majority of oil demand
in 2050 is from uses for which oil is not combusted, such as
chemical feedstocks, lubricants, paraffin waxes and asphalt.
Oil consumption for transportation drops by approximately
90% from 2021. Sectors such as aviation and shipping decline
to a lesser extent and account for approximately 2 mmbd of
demand in 2050.
• Oil supply: Lower demand implies that less supply is required.
However, because of the natural decline inherent in oil
production, even under the NZE Scenario, ongoing investment
in existing fields is still needed. Upstream oil investment
averages approximately $300 billion per year through 2030

30

APS

20

10
NZE
2050

0
2015

2020

2040

Historic

IEA APS

Industry

Buildings

IEA STEPS

Electricity

Transport

Other

APS = Announced Pledges Scenario
STEPS = Stated Policies Scenario
Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
18

2050

• Oil price: The NZE Scenario projects that the price of oil drops
to approximately $35 per barrel by 2030 and to less than $25
per barrel by 2050 in real terms. We have assumed this global oil
price represents Brent.

“there is continued investment in existing
fields ... to ensure that supply does not fall
faster than the decline in demand”4
natural gas
• Natural gas demand: The NZE Scenario approximates that gas
demand peaks in the near term and drops 30% through 2030 to
3,300 bcm and 1,200 bcm in 2050, 70% lower than in 2021. By
2050, approximately 40% of global natural gas demand goes to
CCUS-paired hydrogen production.
• Natural gas supply: As with oil, continued natural gas
investment is needed to maintain supply at existing fields in the
NZE Scenario. Natural gas investment averages approximately
$200 billion per year through 2030 and $85 billion per year
thereafter. Under the NZE Scenario, traded volumes of liquefied
natural gas (LNG) fall by two-thirds and traded volumes of
pipeline gas fall by 85% between 2021 and 2050.
• Natural gas price: The NZE Scenario includes projections
for country- and region-level gas prices in the United States,
European Union, China and Japan. The United States benchmark
decreases to $1.9 per mmbtu in 2030 and $1.8 per mmbtu in
2050. The European Union benchmark decreases to $4.6 per
mmbtu in 2030 and $3.8 per mmbtu in 2050. The China and
Japan benchmarks decrease to approximately $6 per mmbtu
in 2030 and $5.1 per mmbtu in 2050. The lack of granular
market descriptors and/or regional information in the dataset
necessitates additional judgments; we have made additional
assumptions to convert these prices to regional benchmarks.

CCUS, hydrogen and renewable fuels
• CCUS: The NZE Scenario assumes implementation of policies
to support a range of measures that establish markets for
CCUS investment. By 2050, approximately 6.2 Gt of carbon are
captured. While efforts are pursued to increase the efficiency
of industrial processes such as cement manufacturing in the
NZE Scenario, CCUS plays an important role in limiting these
emissions from harder-to-abate energy-consuming sectors. In
addition, many developing nations have recently built or are
building large numbers of coal power plants. Given the service
life of these facilities, retrofitting them with CCUS will be central
to reducing emissions in these economies.
• Hydrogen: Lower carbon intensity hydrogen production
increases from very low current levels to approximately
450 million tonnes in 2050 in the NZE Scenario projections.
Approximately 60% is used in end-use sectors, such as for steel
and chemical production, with the remainder converted to
power or other fuels. By 2050, over 70% of hydrogen production
is from electrolysis, with the remainder largely from natural gas
in combination with CCUS.
• Renewable fuels: Renewable fuels supplies accelerate in the
NZE Scenario, with liquid biofuels expanding by a factor of
approximately three and biogases by a factor of approximately
12 by 2050. Liquid demand is driven by conventional ethanol and
biodiesel for passenger cars and trucks through 2030, shifting
to advanced biodiesel and sustainable aviation fuel for shipping
and aviation through 2050. Advanced liquid biofuels increase
their share of the global aviation fuel market to 40% in 2050.
In addition, biogas and biomethane are used for clean cooking
fuels and transport via compressed natural gas (CNG) in the
NZE Scenario.

refined products
In the NZE Scenario, rapid electrification of the vehicle fleet
leads to a sharp decline in demand for refined products, such as
gasoline and diesel, which implies decreased refinery throughput.
At the same time, demand for noncombusted refined products,
such as petrochemicals, remains more resilient. Refineries able to
shift production to chemicals and biofuels may gain competitive
advantage, as both of these products see increased demand
through 2030. Nevertheless, the scale of changes in the
NZE Scenario would inevitably lead to rationalization. Refineries
able to shift to other areas, such as chemical recycling, renewable
fuels or hydrogen production, may be able to reconfigure to avoid
full closure.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
19

portfolio analysis
We tested our portfolio against projected global demand and
prices under the NZE Scenario. The NZE Scenario is hypothetical
and relies on assumptions that would entail unprecedented
policy and other actions by a large number of stakeholders and
governments worldwide to achieve net zero global emissions by
2050. While the NZE Scenario paints a fundamentally different
and generally unlikely picture of the energy future, based on
the assumptions underlying the scenario, we believe Chevron
could transition to help meet the world’s evolving energy needs
projected in the NZE Scenario by taking a number of actions,
including: further focusing our upstream portfolio on assets that
are the most competitive from a returns, cost of supply and carbon
intensity perspective in the short term and midterm; aligning our
downstream and chemicals business around scaled, efficient,
flexible, integrated and high-margin value chains and renewable
fuels; and concentrating our New Energies investments in highdemand growth areas where we have competitive advantage,
such as CCUS and hydrogen. Our business model can evolve to
deliver the growth of our New Energies business if policies, such
as significant economywide carbon prices envisioned in the
NZE Scenario, enable lower carbon solutions to scale. Under this
hypothetical scenario, we would expect to experience reductions
in projected free cash flow* as we evolve from a company focused
primarily on hydrocarbon extraction and refining to one primarily
focused on low-carbon fuels, low-carbon gases and CCUS. In
the long term, New Energies would likely generate the majority
of Chevron’s free cash flow. As such, New Energies would shift
from being a small segment in the portfolio to becoming the most
significant contributor to free cash flow.
• Short-term and midterm impacts (0–10 years), upstream: In
the NZE Scenario, Chevron’s upstream investments would likely
decrease, adapting to changing industry economics. Our existing
portfolio is diverse and flexible, which would allow us to mitigate
risk and enable the prioritization of capital to existing assets and
resource bases with the highest returns, lowest cost of supply
and lowest carbon intensity within our portfolio. In addition, our
GHG reduction investments would enable us to further reduce
the carbon intensity of our assets and supply the market with
lower carbon intensity crude oil and natural gas, which is still
needed in the NZE Scenario. Upstream capital and exploratory
spending, production and free cash flow would decline over
the first decade in the NZE Scenario; however, free cash flow is
projected to remain positive.

States, give us the flexibility to respond to commodity
price volatility. Our assets in Kazakhstan, the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico, Nigeria, Angola and the Eastern Mediterranean
would continue to generate positive free cash flow in the
short term at lower commodity prices, given limited pointforward investment requirements. These assets provide
opportunities for investment in infill drilling and backfill
projects that are typically higher return and lower risk, given
that they leverage existing assets and infrastructure. Our
LNG assets in Australia would generate positive free cash
flow in an environment that lacks substantial price growth
with our existing asset base and select backfill investments.
We believe that our advantaged asset base would continue
to attract capital and generate competitive returns even in a
hypothetical low-price environment like the NZE Scenario.
– In a declining-demand and low-price environment like the
NZE Scenario, operating costs would likely decline across
the portfolio, driven by efficiency initiatives and portfolio
rationalization, and a general reduction in industry cost
structure would occur due to reduced demand for goods
and services.
• Short-term and midterm impacts (0–10 years), downstream:
Although the NZE Scenario shows a sharp decline in demand for
conventional transport fuels, we believe that the downstream
portion of our portfolio would remain resilient through 2030 due
to continued demand for certain products, including chemicals
and lubricants, combined with the actions we have taken to
enhance refinery competitiveness. In addition, our investments
in the renewable fuels value chain, like our acquisition of
Renewable Energy Group, Inc. in 2022 and our joint venture
with Bunge North America, Inc., would provide opportunities
for more rapid growth as demand for these commodities would
increase in the NZE Scenario. Petrochemical demand also
increases slightly through 2030 in the NZE Scenario, which could
help grow free cash flow from the chemical business.
• Short-term and midterm impacts (0–10 years), New Energies:
Our focus on scaling lower carbon intensity hydrogen and CCUS
solutions aligns with the significant demand growth that occurs
in this decade in the NZE Scenario. As is typical of a business in
its growth stage, we expect that New Energies’ free cash flow
will be negative during the next decade as we invest in projects.
We believe it could become positive and continue to grow post2030 if businesses scale and achieve positive rates of return and
policy remains supportive in the NZE Scenario.

– Today, much of our upstream investment is focused in
short-cycle, lower carbon intensity assets or development
of major existing fields. Our short-cycle assets, like those in
the Permian and the Denver-Julesburg basins in the United

* Free cash flow is a non-generally accepted accounting principles metric and is defined as net cash
provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. It generally represents the cash available
to creditors and investors after investing in the business.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
20

• Long-term impacts (10-plus years), upstream:
In this scenario, post-2030, upstream investment would be
limited to only our assets that provide the highest returns and
have the lowest cost of supply and lowest carbon intensity,
signposted by the pace of global demand decline in the
NZE Scenario. Positive free cash flow would likely decrease
substantially as production would decline. In the NZE Scenario,
between 2040 and 2050, positive free cash flows end. The NZE
Scenario will ultimately advantage producers at the lowest end
of the cost of supply stack. An increase in hydrogen demand
could create opportunities to supply gas for CCUS-paired
hydrogen from our Permian Basin, Denver-Julesburg Basin and
legacy gas assets, such as Gorgon and Wheatstone in Australia
and those in the Eastern Mediterranean.
• Long-term impacts (10-plus years), downstream:
The continued decline in demand for gasoline and diesel would
result in reduced need for those products globally. Lighter
crudes and lower runs would lead to less feed for conversion
units in more complex refineries, which in the absence of
flexibility, efficiency and reconfiguration could disadvantage
high-conversion refineries (e.g., coking) relative to simpler
refineries. Our investments in renewable fuels could allow for
full refinery conversion to meet the continued demand for
these fuels in the NZE Scenario. In addition, tightly integrated
value chains, in areas such as the U.S. West Coast, the U.S. Gulf
Coast and Asia, could enable us to pivot these operations to
lower carbon intensity hydrogen. Finally, the continued demand
for chemicals could enable continued select investments in
petrochemical facilities.
• Long-term impacts (10-plus years), New Energies:
New Energies would generate a significantly larger share of
Chevron free cash flow in 2050 as the demand for lower carbon
intensity hydrogen and CCUS continues to increase in the NZE
Scenario. We expect that New Energies’ free cash flow will
turn positive between 2030 and 2040, given the assumptions
previously mentioned. The rise in carbon prices and enabling
policies assumed in the NZE Scenario create significant demand
growth for lower carbon intensity hydrogen and CCUS. Our
investments in these areas would continue to grow, potentially
enabling us to meaningfully pivot and scale into them.

summary of scenario test
Although our asset mix would need to evolve to adapt to various
scenarios, we believe our signpost framework (see page 29) and
portfolio management approach (see pages 23–24) would enable
Chevron to pivot and scale into areas of opportunity under the
modeled assumptions.
We believe our processes for tracking leading indicators and
adapting our business enable us to be flexible in response to
potential changes in policy, supply, demand and physical risk.

stranded assets
High-profile publications have stated that the portfolios of many
oil and gas companies are not competitive in a “well below
2° C world,” implying that companies and their investors have
significant exposure to “stranded” assets because a company’s
value is tied to undeveloped assets. Chevron has several robust
processes and controls in place to assess our reserves and the
economic productivity of our assets.
As part of the internal control process related to reserves
estimation, the company maintains a Reserves Advisory
Committee, an organization that is separate from the business
units that estimate reserves, chaired by the Manager of Global
Reserves. Annually, the company assesses whether any changes
have occurred in facts or circumstances, such as changes to
development plans, regulations or government policies, that
would warrant a revision to reserve estimates. A common
way to evaluate the depth of a company’s reserves is to divide
the quantity of proved reserves (R) by the annual production
(P), creating a ratio (R/P) that indicates the number of years
remaining before all proved reserves will be produced. At the
end of 2022, Chevron’s R/P ratio was 10.2 years.
Impairment reviews are triggered when events test market
assumptions upon which our business plans and long-term
investment decisions are made and are based on management’s
best estimate of future expected cash flows.
Reserve changes and the results of our impairment review
processes are detailed in the company’s 2022 Annual Report
on Form 10-K.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
21

section 3

strategy
3.1 long-term fundamentals ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 24
3.2 future energy mix ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 29
3.3 demand and supply .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 31
3.4 prices: near term and long term ....................................................................................................................................................................... 36

Photo: A worker at a tankless facility in Greeley, Colorado.
Tankless production facilities reduce GHG emissions and surface footprint.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
22

section 3: strategy
our strategy is to leverage our
strengths to safely deliver lower carbon
energy to a growing world

The world’s energy demand in recent years is greater than at
any time in human history (Exhibit 6). Most published outlooks
conclude that fossil fuels will remain a significant part of an energy
system that increasingly incorporates lower carbon sources of
supply. Within this context, we align our strategy with areas in
which we have a competitive advantage and in which we see the
potential to generate increased value for our investors.

higher returns, lower carbon

Oil and gas reservoirs and resources decline naturally over time –
investment is needed to maintain them in order to meet projected
demand, even in lower carbon scenarios. Given this, we will
continue to develop resources to help fulfill the world’s demand for
energy. At the same time, we will maintain flexibility in our portfolio
and examine ways to adapt investment patterns in response to
changing policy, demand and energy transition opportunities.
We discuss our approach to each energy transition opportunity in
Section 4, “Portfolio” (see pages 38–49).

Our purpose is to develop the affordable, reliable, ever-cleaner
energy that enables human progress. We operate in many
jurisdictions that have enacted lower carbon policies. Policyenabled markets are advancing around the world with emerging
support for mandatory reporting, renewables, electric vehicles,
hydrogen fuel and CCUS technologies, among others. Under
current and potential future market conditions, we seek to
understand the impacts of climate-related policies to help guide
our actions.

Exhibit 6. Global energy transformation since 1900
(Quadrillion BTU)
Total primary
energy demand
under IEA STEPS
2022–2050

250

800
700

Energy source demand

600
500

150

400
Total primary
energy demand
1900–2022

100

300

Total primary energy demand

200

200
50
100
0
1900

Coal

0
1910

Oil

1920

1930

Natural gas

1940

1950

Nuclear

1960

1970

Hydropower

1980

1990

2000

Other renewables

2010

2020

2030

Traditional biomass

2040

2050

Modern biomass

Sources, as modified by Chevron Corporation: 1900–1970, Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser and Pablo Rosado (2022), “Energy,” OurWorldInData.org, ourworldindata.org/energy; Energy Institute Statistical Review of
World Energy (2023); Vaclav Smil (2017); 1971–2020, IEA (2022), World Energy Balances (database), iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/world-energy-balances-highlights; 2021–2050, IEA, World Energy
Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
23

We believe that lower carbon intensity oil and gas assets
will remain economically competitive under a wide range of
future scenarios. We also believe that our asset mix enables us
to be flexible in response to potential changes in supply and
demand, even in hypothetical lower carbon scenarios like the NZE
Scenario (see pages 16–21 of Section 2). Our growing new energy
businesses provide us with the opportunity to deploy capital and
generate returns in accelerated energy transition pathways.
The scale of investment and time involved in finding, extracting and
processing oil and gas requires long-term planning and decision
making to effectively manage the uncertainties inherent in these
markets. Our strategic and business planning processes guide our
actions as we aim to safely deliver higher returns and lower carbon.
Key strategic processes that support our ability to operate in a
lower carbon future include:
• Decision analysis (DA): Our DA process is structured for
developing, evaluating and comparing alternatives, including
future options, in the face of risk and uncertainty. Our DA
function incorporates deterministic and probabilistic analyses
and economic and financial analysis tools, along with debiasing
techniques, to improve decision quality in many of the
following processes.
• Capital-project approvals: Investments are developed,
approved and implemented in the context of the strategic plan,
segment-specific business plans and commodity price forecasts.
Investment proposals are evaluated by management and, as
appropriate, reported to the Executive Committee and the Board
of Directors. Final decisions are guided by a strategic assessment
of the business landscape. GHG-related factors are considered in
project-appropriation assessments.

• Business-development screening: Our screening processes to
assess opportunities include a range of considerations, such as
portfolio fit and impact on portfolio carbon intensity.
• Marginal abatement cost curve (MACC): Our MACC process
is a disciplined and value-driven approach to cost-effectively
reduce the carbon intensity of our operations and assets by
optimizing carbon reduction opportunities and integrating GHG
mitigation technologies across the enterprise (see page 39).
We source emissions reduction opportunities from operated
and nonoperated assets. We apply both deterministic and
probabilistic analysis to assess opportunities, consistent
with our DA practices. We use portfolio theory and efficient
frontier analysis to identify a portfolio of opportunities
across the technology spectrum, segments, business units
and geographies.

3.1 long-term fundamentals
Fundamentals that drive strategic focus and action
Chevron’s strategic and business planning processes bring
together our views on long-term energy market fundamentals to help guide decisions on strategy, portfolio
management, business planning and capital allocation by
executives and to facilitate oversight by the Board of Directors
(Exhibit 7). We use models and internal analysis to forecast
demand, energy mix, supply, commodity prices and carbon
prices, all of which include assumptions about future policy
and technology developments. A cross-functional team tracks
and forecasts long-term fundamentals to inform us of potential
changes in market dynamics that could indicate the need for
changes to strategy.

Exhibit 7. A disciplined approach to strategy development

economic macrotrends

long-term
market
fundamentals

population growth, increased living
standards and consumer behavior

policy

policy trends, framework and impacts

total
demand

for energy
and mix

supply

level and
cost of supply

technology

technology breakthroughs and scale-up

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
24

price

for each
energy solution

strategic
focus

3.1.1 Macroeconomic and demographic drivers
Affordable, reliable energy enables economic development by
facilitating modern production techniques across all segments of
the economy, which ultimately leads to increased life spans and a
higher quality of life. 5

Exhibit 8. Billions of people would benefit from affordable,
reliable and ever-cleaner energy

Percentage of population using
wood or other solid fuels for cooking

Individuals and society benefit from access to affordable, reliable
and ever-cleaner energy (Exhibit 8). As populations increase and
urbanize and as incomes grow and billions of people in lessdeveloped countries seek a higher standard of living, many experts
forecast global energy demand to increase (Exhibit 9), even as
the energy intensity of the world’s economic output declines.6
Developing economies currently consume 59.1 gigajoules of
energy per person as compared with 160 gigajoules per person in
advanced economies. Energy use per person across developing
economies is approximately 37% of the levels across advanced
economies, up from 29% a decade ago.
As advanced economies shift to the service sector, they outsource
their manufacturing to developing economies. Rising income
levels, population growth and manufacturing expansion contribute
to increased energy consumption across developing economies,
helping to close the gap with advanced economies. As incomes
improve, more economic growth comes from the service
sector, which is often more energy- and carbon-efficient than
manufacturing. Technological advancements and improvements in
energy efficiency will likely further reduce energy intensity.
Changes in consumer behavior can also influence energy demand.
Behaviors like remote working and videoconferencing can lead to
a decrease in energy demand. Others, like more home deliveries,
can lead to an increase in energy demand. The impact of behavior
changes may be modulated by other demand drivers, such as
government policies or the long life of existing infrastructure.
In 2022, the residential sector accounted for approximately 15%
of natural gas consumption in the United States, and natural gas
was the source of approximately 42% of residential sector enduse energy consumption.7 Approximately 60% of homes in the
United States use natural gas for space and water heating, cooking,
and drying clothes.8 Demand for natural gas is primarily driven
by existing homes and buildings, which typically have very long
service lives. The IEA estimates that half of the buildings expected
to be in use by 2050 are already built.9

36%

Source: World Health Organization, Proportion of Population with Primary Reliance on Clean Fuels and
Technologies, who.int/data/gho/data/themes/air-pollution/household-air-pollution. Wood or other
solid fuels for cooking are defined by WHO as biomass, charcoal, coal and kerosene.

Exhibit 9. A growing middle class drives demand
for access to energy
(Exajoules)

Total primary energy demand,
IEA Stated Policies Scenario
600

400

200

0

2010

2020

Developing economies

2030

2040

2050

Advanced economies

Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY
4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
25

3.1.2 Policy trends
Policies, like those that support the Paris Agreement, can change
the amount of energy consumed, the rate of energy-demand
growth, the mix of energy sources and the relative economics of
one fuel versus another. Tracking and anticipating policy trends
helps us identify potential changes in energy mix and supplyand-demand scenarios and adjust our outlooks accordingly. We
discuss our policy framework and impact analysis in Section 5,
“Performance and Policy” (see pages 54–64).
The Paris Agreement specifies a goal of “holding the increase in the
global average temperature to well below 2° C above pre-industrial
levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to
1.5° C above pre-industrial levels.” 10 Under the agreement, each
country may pursue its own strategies for achieving its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs). According to the IEA, the
current NDCs do not appear likely to achieve the goals of the
agreement,11 although new, updated or reconfirmed NDCs are
intended to be submitted.
According to the IPCC, achieving the Paris Agreement’s goals
will require peaking emissions as soon as possible and global
net zero emissions by around 2070 (2065–2080). The IPCC finds
that achieving a 1.5° C scenario with high confidence and without
any temporary overshoot would require net zero by around
2050 (2045–2055). Other IPCC scenarios reach net zero later
this century, but they achieve 1.5° C outcomes through greater
adoption of CO₂ removal opportunities. Achieving a 1.5° C goal
will require countries to reduce emissions across all sectors of the
economy. It will also require increasing removals by sinks, such as
nature-based solutions (e.g., forestry), which absorb more carbon
than they release, and through technology solutions (e.g., CCUS).12
The IPCC notes numerous potential pathways to achieving the
goals of the Paris Agreement. All pathways include the continued
use of oil and gas, even in rapid decarbonization scenarios. To
achieve net zero emissions by 2050, direct air carbon dioxide
capture and storage and carbon capture and storage (CCS) must
be scaled up and globally deployed. Without this technology, the
IPCC climate models cannot achieve theoretical solutions to reach
net zero in the desired time frame.13

Removals: The IPCC 1.5° C report points out that many pathways
to achieving the <2° C goal will require “negative emissions”
approaches. Negative emissions, or CO₂ removals, are often
classified as natural climate solutions and technology removals,
like carbon capture. Both can be essential tools in mitigating
GHG emissions and meeting the goals of the Paris Agreement
(Exhibit 10).14 In its Sixth Assessment Report, the IPCC continues to
recognize the importance of “deploying carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) methods to counterbalance residual GHG emissions.” 15 CCUS
can play a dual role in climate change mitigation: It can be used for
technology to remove carbon from the atmosphere with direct air
capture (DAC) and reduce emissions from point sources in energyintensive industries and power generation.16 According to the IEA
Announced Pledges Scenario (APS), CCUS may grow over 100-fold
by 2050. To unlock the full potential of natural climate solutions
and CCUS, advancement of supportive policy as well as legal and
carbon accounting frameworks are needed. For example, if CO₂
is shipped internationally or natural climate solutions are used to
create an environmental attribute that is sold to a party in another
country, corporate and national GHG inventory accounting could
be impacted.17

Exhibit 10. CCUS and natural climate solutions could make a
long-term contribution toward reducing GHG emissions
(Gigatonnes CO₂e per year)
12

8

4

0

3.1.3 Technology trends
Improvements in technology can reduce energy costs, lower
emissions and influence the energy mix by changing the relative
competitiveness of different energy types. Four prominent areas
of investment include CO₂ removals, hydrogen, renewable fuels
and battery storage. Removals, hydrogen and renewable fuels in
particular are important technologies to assist in carbon intensity
reduction of hard-to-abate sectors. A lifecycle approach to carbon
accounting can help assess the relative carbon efficiencies of
different technologies. We discuss assessing performance on
a lifecycle basis in Section 5, “Performance and Policy”
(see pages 51–52).

CCUS

2021

2030

2050

Natural climate solutions

Sources: Griscom, Bronson et al., “Natural Climate Solutions,” Proceeding of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, October 2017, pnas.org/content/114/44/11645; University
College London, Future Demand, Supply and Prices for Voluntary Carbon Credits—Keeping the
Balance, June 2021, trove-research.com/report/carbon-credit-demand-supply-and-prices; IEA,
World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report),
CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
26

Hydrogen: Hydrogen is a versatile energy carrier, with potential as
a lower carbon fuel, particularly in sectors where carbon intensity
is harder to abate, including heavy-duty transportation, marine
transportation and heat-intensive manufacturing. Hydrogen
may also play a role in the power generation sector as a fuel
source and as a storage medium to balance intermittency of
renewables. Lower carbon intensity hydrogen demand could
significantly increase if infrastructure is built and hydrogen costs
come down (Exhibit 11).18 The emergence of hydrogen value
chains connecting producers with consumers is also critical to
enabling scale. Government policies can help reduce costs and
lower the risk of investment for early entrants. Transparent and
standard quantification of carbon intensity of hydrogen and
hydrogen-derived fuels is needed to inform decision making and
accelerate effective reductions. More than 15 different standards
exist or are under development to calculate hydrogen carbon
intensity. Each varies on key approaches, such as temporal and
geographical location of renewable energy used for hydrogen
production 19 and chain of custody requirements. The same activity
or product having a different emissions performance assessment
can lead to methodology arbitrage, market fragmentation
and suboptimal investment.

Exhibit 11. Under the IEA APS, hydrogen demand could
significantly increase by midcentury
(bcm/y)
800

600

Battery storage: Over the past decade, there has been notable
cost reduction and performance improvement in lithium-ion
(Li-ion) batteries and other storage technologies. However, in
recent years, cost declines have slowed, and in 2022, costs actually
increased due to higher raw material prices and supply chain
constraints.20 Renewable energy production and technology
advancements such as smart-grid and demand-management,
coupled with battery storage, have the potential to increase
electrification and reduce carbon emissions. These advances
facilitate increased use of renewable energy in electricity
generation and help mitigate the problem of intermittency.
Assessing the carbon efficiency of technologies enabled by
batteries can be enhanced using a lifecycle approach to carbon
accounting. For example, batteries can account for up to 60% of
GHG emissions in electric vehicle (EV) production. 21 Including
emissions associated with battery production in a lifecycle
assessment of carbon accounting can provide a more complete
assessment of relative GHG performance.

400

200

0

Renewable fuels: Renewable fuels can be produced from
bio-based feedstocks through conventional refining process
technologies and include biodiesel, renewable diesel, sustainable
aviation fuel (SAF) and advanced gasoline. The IEA notes that
renewable fuels will be central to reducing emissions from longdistance transportation, aviation and high-temperature heat
industries. Renewable fuels are particularly important in lowering
the carbon intensity of transportation, serving as low-carbon
solutions for existing technologies, such as light-duty vehicles
in the near term and heavy-duty trucks, ships and aircraft with
few alternative solutions in the long term. Many renewable
fuels are compatible with existing infrastructure and can be used
with existing technologies, making them an attractive loweremissions substitute for conventional fuels. Use of renewable
fuels can result in lower emissions than conventional fuels on
a lifecycle basis, depending on feedstocks, production pathways,
and carbon accounting treatment of emissions associated
with cropland cultivation and avoided emissions. Differences
in accounting treatment can result in the same biofuel appearing
to have different carbon performance.

2021

2030

2050

Industry

Buildings

Power

Transport

Input for H2-based fuels

Other

Even with improvements in energy storage, many leading energy
experts agree that additional technology breakthroughs are
needed to enable wider scaling of renewables and decarbonization
in other hard-to-abate sectors. We believe CCUS and hydrogen are
among the most promising of these other technologies.

Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY
4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
27

Exhibit 12. Energy density of different fuel sources can drive the attractiveness of fuel types

Weight saving

140

120

Hydrogen (350 bar)

Hydrogen (liquid)
Hydrogen (700 bar)

Potential with
storage tank
improvement

100
Gravimetric density, megajoules/kg

Hydrogen

Batteries
Lithium-ion battery pack (2018)

80

Lithium metal battery pack

Natural gas

Lithium-ion battery pack (2025+)

60

Liquid fuels

Liquefied natural gas

Renewable diesel
Compressed natural
gas (250 bar)

40

Sustainable aviation fuel
Gasoline

Diesel
Jet fuel

Biodiesel
Compressed natural
gas (250 bar, with tank)

20

Ethanol
Methanol

Hydrogen (700 bar, with tank)
Liquid organic hydrogen carriers

Space saving

0
0

10

20

30

40

Volumetric density, megajoules/liter
Sources: Argonne National Laboratory, GREET Model Fuel Specifications, 2022, greet.anl.gov; Advanced Automotive Battery Conference (AABC) for Li-ion Battery Performance,
2018, with Chevron internal compilations.

Energy density of different fuels: The energy density and
portability of a fuel are among the most important characteristics
when considering viability for use in transportation (Exhibit 12).
Two important aspects are as follows:
• Gravimetric density, the energy contained in a unit mass of fuel,
determines how far a vehicle can travel with a given amount of
fuel. Higher gravimetric density means less weight is required to
be carried as fuel, meaning more weight capacity is available for
carrying people and freight.
• Volumetric density, the energy stored in a unit volume of fuel,
determines how much space the fuel takes up. Higher volumetric
energy density means less vehicle space is required to store
the fuel, and thus more space is available for carrying people
and freight.

Fundamental differences in energy densities are a major obstacle
to using alternative fuels for some modes of transport, such as
long-distance shipping and air travel. To date, few alternative fuels
or energy storage systems can surpass the energy densities of
liquid fuels.
Gaseous fuels, like CNG and hydrogen, currently require large and
heavy tanks for onboard vehicle storage. Further research and
development are needed to reduce the weight and size of such
storage tanks. Li-ion battery systems have achieved considerable
progress in light-duty vehicle applications in the past decade,
but some trade-offs in range, which is dictated by energy density,
still exist. 22

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
28

3.2 future energy mix
We have a cross-functional team that forecasts the energy system
decades into the future. By tracking and analyzing energy demand
and energy mix drivers, we work to understand which sources of
energy supply, including oil and gas, are likely to meet expected
demand. We believe the energy mix will continue to be primarily
determined by the economics of each energy supply source, which
are influenced by the intersection of cost of production as well as
by macroeconomic and consumer, policy and technology trends.
The relative importance of these factors can vary by region and
over time.
Though oil and gas may one day fall below today’s share of the
energy supply, many energy experts agree that these commodities
will be required to satisfy global energy demand under almost any
future market scenario – even one in which policies increasingly
aim to limit fossil fuel use and reduce GHG emissions (Exhibit 13). 23

government policy and the deployment of low-carbon
technologies. Our signposts also track progress in emerging
energy technologies, including battery storage, modular nuclear
and fusion, that could radically transform the energy system should
breakthroughs occur.
Exhibit 13. Most scenarios, which vary in likelihood, show a
range of energy sources will make up the future energy mix
(Exajoules)
250
200
150
100

Oil and gas currently account for a majority of global energy
supply, at approximately 330 exajoules per year, and have a
diverse set of end uses (Exhibit 15). In some uses, like aviation,
marine, freight and petrochemicals, there are few, if any, costeffective and scalable alternatives to oil. Reduction in oil demand is
limited by the slow turnover of transportation stock (Exhibit 16). 24

50
0
Oil

Gas

2022 Demand

Coal

Wind and solar

OLCE*

2040 Average scenario demand

2040 Scenario ranges

As the future is uncertain, we leverage signposts that help us
track market conditions and the evolution of the energy system
(Exhibit 14). Our signpost framework includes indicators for energy
investment, consumer behavior, raw material inputs, electrification,

Sources: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License:
CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A); BNEF Scenarios: Energy Transition Scenario 2022,
Net Zero Scenario 2022; Wood Mackenzie Scenarios (2022): Energy Transition Outlook, Accelerated
Energy Transition 2° C; S&P Global Commodity Insights Scenarios (2022): Inflections (IHSM),
Green Rules (IHSM), Discord (IHSM), Accelerated CCS (IHSM), Multitechnology Mitigation (IHSM),
December Most Likely Case (Platts), 2° C Case (Platts).
* OLCE: Other low-carbon energy (nuclear, hydrogen and biomass)

Exhibit 14. Select signposts we monitor to track the energy transition
CCUS capacity and CO₂ captured
(Million tonnes of CO₂e)

Electrolyser capacity for lower
carbon intensity hydrogen
60
(Gigawatts)

Renewable fuel capacity production
(Billion gallons/year)

Electricity share of global total
primary energy supply
(Percent)

Forecast

1,400

Forecast

60

30

60 Current

800

Forecast

40
Forecast
Current

Fore

Current

Curre

40

Current

40700

28

Current

600

Forecast

26

20
400
24
20
200
0
2022

20
0
0

2022

2026

Current capacity
2022
2026
Forecast apacity
Current
Forecast

2030
2030
Scenarios:

2026

0 Current
2022

Forecast
2026

2030

0

2022

Current

Current capacity
Forecast capacity
STEPS 2030

22

2030

NZE 2030

2026

Forecast

2030

20

2022

Current

2026

2030

Forecast

APS 2030

Forecast: Renewable fuels includes new projects that have been announced that are under construction or have reached final investment decision (FID); CCUS includes under-construction and planned CO₂
capture
facilities
with an announced
capacity of more
than
100,000 tonnes per year (or 1,000 tonnes per year for DAC)
and an
announced timeline;
lower carbon intensity
hydrogen
production from
STEPS
2030
NZE 2030
APS
2030
2030
NZEelectrolysers
2030
STEPS
2030
NZE 2030
APSSTEPS
2030
includes projected capacity on the basis of announced projects; electricity forecast from S&P Global Commodity Insights, Inflections base-case scenario.
Source:
IEA, World
Energy Outlook
iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A); IEA, CCUS Projects Database, iea.org/data-and-statistics/dataSTEPS
2030
NZE2022,
2030
APS 2030
product/ccus-projects-database, License: CC BY 4.0; BloombergNEF, Global Renewable Fuel Projects Tracker (1.2.2), bnef.com/insights/26611; S&P Global Commodity Insights Scenarios (2023): Inflections (IHSM).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
29

APS 2030

Exhibit 15. Oil and gas have many important and diverse uses, as shown in world energy flows
Rail
Passenger

Transport
Oil

Transport – other
Marine
Aviation
Industry – other
Industry
Iron, steel

Natural gas
Chemical, petchem
Non-energy use*

Heat

Coal

Residential

Commercial

Nuclear

Electricity

Agriculture,
forestry, fishing

Geothermal
Solar, wind, other
Hydro

Power losses*

Biofuels, waste

Own use, processing
Non-specified use*

* Power loss = Thermal loss from the generation of electricity and loss in gas distribution, electricity transmission and coal transport. Non-energy use = Those fuels that are used as raw materials in the different
sectors and are not consumed as a fuel or transformed into another fuel. Non-energy use is shown separately in final consumption under the heading “non-energy use.” Non-specified use = All fuel use not
elsewhere specified, as well as consumption in the above-designated categories for which separate figures have not been provided. Military fuel use for all mobile and stationary use is included here (e.g., ships,
aircraft, roads and energy used in living quarters), regardless of whether the fuel delivered is for the military of that country or for the military of another country.
Based on data from: IEA, 2021 World Balances, excluding “Other Energy Sector” balances, iea.org/sankey/, modified by Chevron Corporation.

Exhibit 16. Turnover of energy infrastructure will influence the pace of change

12

13

17

27

30

50+

75

pickups

passenger
cars

other
trucks

aircraft

gas
power plants

gas
pipelines

buildings

years

years

years

years

years

years

Sources: Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS), Average Age of Automobiles and Trucks in Operation in the United States, bts.gov/content/average-age-automobiles-and-trucksoperation-united-states; BTS, Average Age of Aircraft 2019, bts.gov/2019-average-age-aircraft; Energy Information Administration (EIA), Natural Gas Explained: Natural Gas Pipelines,
eia.gov/energyexplained/natural-gas/natural-gas-pipelines.php; EIA, Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2023: Commercial Demand Module, eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/assumptions/
pdf/CDM_Assumptions.pdf; Portland Cement Association, Durability, cement.org/learn/concrete-technology/durability.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
30

years

3.3 demand and supply
How we approach demand: Our views on short- and long-term demand
are based on analysis of macroeconomic and demographic trends,
technological pathways, consumers’ behavioral patterns, and policy
impacts, among other factors. Growing populations, rising incomes and
urbanization are the principal forces behind energy-demand growth,
as they typically lead to greater use of transportation, heating, cooling,
lighting and refrigeration. Policies will continue to play a large role in
aggregate energy demand and fuel mix. Given the range of uncertainty
across key demand drivers, we analyze multiple demand scenarios as part
of our annual planning cycle.

How we approach supply: Every year, we develop a range of longterm supply scenarios for oil, gas and refined products to inform our
views on prices, test our strategies and assess business risks. The process
involves our proprietary view of the principal drivers of supply growth,
including resource supply curves, production constraints, capacities
at secondary processing facilities, fiscal and financial requirements,
and geopolitical trends and shifts. Given the complex set of variables
and uncertainties associated with forecasting long-term supply, we
routinely examine multiple scenarios and assess our forecasts against
third-party perspectives.

3.3.1 View on oil demand
In 2022, global liquid fuel demand rose to approximately
100 mmbd and nearly recovered to pre-COVID-19 levels. 25
The IEA projects global oil demand to grow to approximately
102 mmbd in 2023, supported by the world’s growing demand
for mobility. 26 The 102 mmbd level would represent a new record
high for annual oil consumption. Although global oil demand has
grown at a rate of approximately 1 mmbd, or 1% per year, over the
past several decades, the IEA Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS)
projects that global oil demand will plateau at approximately
102 mmbd through 2050. Future projected growth in China, India
and Southeast Asia is offset by projected demand declines in
advanced economies. Other third-party scenarios project global
oil demand between a low of approximately 70 mmbd and a high
of 112 mmbd in the 2040–2050 horizon, highlighting the range of
future uncertainty on oil’s forward trajectory.

uncertainty about the nature of demand recovery from the
pandemic, limited price recovery, and a more constrained capital
market could lead to inadequate investment, future supply
shortages and price volatility.

3.3.2 View on oil supply
At a macro level, oil supply is significantly impacted by
producers’ strategies to manage near- and long-term uncertainties.
For example, producers respond to demand expectations by
adjusting investment levels. The IEA estimates that upstream oil
and gas investments have risen by 18% since 2020, when they
bottomed out due to COVID-related demand shocks. 27 Further,
geopolitical factors can drive production levels, evidenced
by fluctuations in OPEC+ (OPEC plus 11 non-OPEC members)
production since 2021.
Capital spending on oil and gas is also impacted by the continued
need for maintenance and investment in existing assets to manage
decline rates (Exhibit 17). The production profile for a well, a field
or a geography depends on geological circumstances, engineering
practices and government policies, among other factors.
Although non-OPEC decline rates have been estimated to be
approximately 3% 28 over the past decade, the increasing share of
shale and tight oil has led to higher decline rates. Price declines
stemming from COVID-19 demand shocks and OPEC+ tensions,

Although oil markets are well supplied in the short term, in
the medium term more investment would be required to meet
increased demand – often referred to as the “supply gap.” We
analyze this gap in order to forecast which types of resources will
be needed in the future. Typically, the most economical barrels
are produced from reinvesting in existing production to minimize
natural decline.

Exhibit 17. Realized decline rates determine the size of the
supply gap and opportunities for new investment
(mmboe/d)
110

100

90

80

70

2015

2020

Supply with no new investment
Supply with additional investment
in existing fields

2025

Additional new fields needed
in IEA STEPS
IEA NZE demand

Supply from already approved projects
Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
31

2030

Exhibit 18. Global liquids long-term supply curve and average point forward breakeven prices in 2029
show the supply curve is relatively flat, implying increased competition among producers

$90

International tight oil

$80
Point forward breakeven price range, $ per bbl Brent

Shallow
water OPEC

Deepwater OPEC

Canada
(oil sands)

$70

GTL

Shallow
water
non-OPEC

$60

70

80

Onshore
non-OPEC

Deepwater
non-OPEC

$50

Onshore
OPEC

U.S.
(lower 48)
tight oil

Russia

$40
Iran

$30

Iraq

United
Arab
Emirates

Saudi Arabia

$20
$10
$0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

90

Cumulative liquids capacity 2029 (mmbd)

Average point forward breakeven price
Liquids supply shown includes crude oil, natural gas liquids, coal-to-liquids (CTLs) and gas-to-liquids (GTLs).
Point forward breakeven is the amount of capital needed to produce the resource from today forward. This differs from full-cycle breakeven, which includes all costs for developing a new field. For a
further discussion of breakeven calculations, see Energy Economics, Tight Oil Market Dynamics: Benchmarks, Breakeven Points, and Inelasticities, February 2018, sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0140988317304103.
Source, as modified by Chevron Corporation: Wood Mackenzie, Oil Supply Tool, May 2023.

A common way to visualize oil supply is via a supply curve by
resource type, in which the width of the bar represents the amount
of total production for a given year and the height of the bar
indicates a representative price range over which that resource
is economical to produce (Exhibit 18). Similar types of resources,
or resources from certain regions, are grouped together and thus
show a range of prices instead of a single price. In a more detailed
and expanded version, every field would be its own line on the
supply stack. Assets can move relative to one another when their
breakeven values change due to technology, geopolitical or policy
changes, fiscal terms, or other reasons. The supply stack is a useful
way to gauge trends in the overall cost of supply and whether there
have been shifts through time. However, care should be taken
when drawing detailed conclusions from a supply stack, as the
exact annual values depend on forecasts, such as project timing
and performance.
3.3.3 View on natural gas demand
The IEA estimates that global natural gas demand fell by 1.5%
in 2022 to 4,046 bcm as key markets, notably Europe, faced
an energy crisis and record high prices in the wake of supply
disruptions stemming from the Russia-Ukraine military conflict.
In 2022, LNG accounted for approximately 40% of natural gas

exchanges. 29 The IEA projects global gas demand to remain near
2022 levels in 2023 as growth in Asian gas markets is offset by
further declines in Europe. The STEPS projects that global gas
demand will increase to just over 4,300 bcm in the 2030s and
will plateau around that level through 2050. Growth in natural
gas demand is driven by natural gas’s status as a relatively costcompetitive resource, a desire among industrial consumers to
diversify fuel sources, and efforts in some jurisdictions to reduce
local air pollution and carbon emissions. Gas markets continue to
price regionally, with Asia-Pacific remaining the largest growth
market for gas to 2050. 30 However, Asia will continue to compete
with Europe for incremental LNG supply as the latter seeks to
replace lost Russian supply. Due to concerns around cost and
energy security following the Russia-Ukraine military conflict,
scenario ranges in future demand of natural gas are very wide
for the next decade or so. A recent analysis of third-party future
energy scenarios shows that forecasted natural gas demand in
2040 ranges from roughly 1,000 bcm to 7,000 bcm, a range wider
than total gas demand in 2022 (4,000 bcm).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
32

3.3.4 View on natural gas supply
As with oil, we analyze future gas supply needs against demand
growth in the context of a supply curve to forecast future
economically competitive sources of supply. LNG accounted for
approximately 500 bcm, or approximately 12%, of global natural
gas supply in 2022. LNG is projected to increase to roughly
650 bcm by 2050 per the STEPS, making up approximately 15%
of the global natural gas markets. Many third parties project that
there will be enough capacity from producing assets and projects
under construction to satisfy global demand through 2025
(Exhibit 19). In the medium to long term, a supply gap could open
up as soon as the mid-2020s or beyond 2030, depending on
resilience of demand in Europe, the adoption of gas in emerging
economies, the speed of recently announced LNG liquefaction
and regasification facility construction, and the pace of wind, solar
and energy storage construction. Europe is expected to continue
importing LNG and additional piped gas from North Africa to
displace Russian supply. Asia is expected to experience the
greatest demand growth, and with limited pipeline capacity, the
region is forecasted to import more LNG in the coming decades.
This is one reason LNG is predicted to be the fastest-growing
source of supply within the gas sector.

avoided emissions
The IEA and others have recognized the value and emissions
reductions benefits of switching from coal to natural gas. Per
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory’s (NREL) analysis,
electricity generated from natural gas is approximately 50% of
the lifecycle carbon intensity of electricity from coal, inclusive
of emissions associated with flaring, venting, fugitives
and end use. 31

Lifecycle GHG emissions estimates for
electricity generation technologies powered
by nonrenewable resources
(g CO₂e/kWh)
1,800
Maximum

1,200

Q3

Minimum

600

Exhibit 19. LNG supply and demand scenarios
(bcm)

Median

Q3
Q1

Minimum

1,000

0

800

Natural gas

Coal

Source: NREL, Life Cycle Assessment Harmonization, nrel.gov/analysis/life-cycleassessment.html.

600

400

200

0

Median
Q1

Maximum

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Operational capacity

History

Consultants – high

Under construction

IEA STEPS

Consultants – low

IEA APS

IEA NZE demand

Sources: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A). Wood Mackenzie, LNG Tool, 2023 Q1 dataset,
accessed April 4, 2023, spotfire.woodmac.com/Viewer; S&P Global LNG Analytics, LNG SupplyDemand Forecasts, Scenarios: Demand, accessed April 4, 2023, connect.ihsmarkit.com.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
33

3.3.5 View on refined-products demand
Transportation fuels and petrochemicals have accounted for most
of the growth in global oil demand since 2010 and are expected to
underpin sustained growth in demand over the next decade. In the
STEPS, product-demand growth continues as increases in demand
for transportation services and petrochemicals offset lower
demand due to improved vehicle efficiency, greater use of biofuels
and electrification. The STEPS assumes that EVs reach over 25% of
new vehicle sales globally by 2030, enabling the EV fleet to expand
by 11-fold this decade. Rising EV adoption and improving vehicle
efficiency contribute to reduce gasoline demand by just over
2.2 mmbd by 2040. Overall liquid fuel demand increases by over
10 mmbd by 2040 in the STEPS, with growth primarily driven by air
travel, trucking, shipping and petrochemical feedstocks. Demand
for high-value petrochemicals, used to produce plastics, resins and
fibers (among other products), is projected to rise by almost 20%
between 2021 and 2030 in the STEPS. Policies and technologies
aimed at reducing plastic waste and increased chemical recycling
could reduce demand for oil and gas feedstocks, but even if
recycling rates increase from roughly 5% today to 50% by 2050,
as in the APS, oil demand from the petrochemicals sector is
expected to remain in the 15 mmbd range.
3.3.6 View on refined-products supply
Global refining capacity stood at a little over 101 mmbd as of 2021
(Exhibit 20). As a result of COVID-related demand declines in early
2020, utilization collapsed to less than 75% due to historically low
demand. Refinery closures and conversions have since removed
3.8 mmbd of capacity. 32 By 2022, refinery utilization had increased
to over 91% in the United States and 75% globally, with China and
Russia utilizations still running below pre-COVID or pre-conflict
levels. On an annual average basis, fleetwide refinery utilization
rarely climbs much higher than 95% in the United States because
of maintenance periods and seasonal periods of less demand. 33
Most capacity additions are expected in Asia, where the majority of
demand growth is expected to occur. Additional capacity growth
is expected in the Middle East. 34 Some refiners in the United States
and Europe may convert to renewable and biofuels production
to take advantage of existing and emerging policies. Biofuels
production is expected to increase by 57% by 2030. 35

Exhibit 20. The gap between refinery runs and total capacity
is expected to narrow by 15% by 2040
(mmbd)
120

90

60

30

0

2021

2030

2040

Total capacity

Other Asia-Pacific

Africa

North America

Europe and Russia

Other

China

Middle East

Source: IEA, World Energy Outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022,
License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
34

Exhibit 22. The 2022 global average gas production carbon
intensity was 45 kg CO₂e/boe

Higher-cost production is often correlated with more energyand emissions-intensive production. For example, some heavy
oil may require steam for production, which can impact both
cost and emissions.

LNG is generally more carbon-intensive than gas supplied via
pipeline. Decisions about electrification, recovering waste heat,
avoiding fugitive and vented emissions and flaring, and deploying
CCUS technology can all impact the carbon intensity of gas.

4,440

800

300

300

250

250

200

50th percentile
54 kg CO2e/boe

150

Kilograms CO2e/boe

Kilograms CO2e/boe

Exhibit 21. The 2022 global average oil production carbon
intensity was 59 kg CO₂e/boe

75th percentile
63 kg CO2e/boe

25th percentile
30 kg CO2e/boe

100

150

50th percentile
34 kg CO2e/boe

25th

percentile
33 kg CO2e/boe
Chevron, 2022
28 kg CO2e/boe

100

Chevron, 2022
25 kg CO2e/boe

50

75th percentile
53 kg CO2e/boe

200

50

0

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

0

500

1,000

1,500

mmboe/d

Production

Flaring

2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

4,000

bcm/y

Methane

Production

Venting

Pipeline

LNG

Methane

Note: Based on field-level data.

Note: Based on field-level data.

Source: IEA, The Oil and Gas Industry in Net Zero Transitions, iea.org/reports/the-oil-and-gasindustry-in-net-zero-transitions, License: CC BY 4.0.

Source: IEA, The Oil and Gas Industry in Net Zero Transitions, iea.org/reports/the-oil-and-gasindustry-in-net-zero-transitions, License: CC BY 4.0.

Carbon intensity of upstream production: Carbon intensity,
or CO₂e per unit of production, of each resource type is loosely
correlated to the resource’s position, or cost of production, on
the supply curve. Like the wide distribution of supply cost for each
resource type, carbon intensity for each resource type is widely
distributed and can be influenced by the producer. The charts
from the IEA’s The Oil and Gas Industry in Net Zero Transitions
presented in Exhibits 21 and 22 above represent IEA estimates
for global carbon intensity supply stacks for oil and gas, with the
methane global warming potential (GWP) converted to the IPCC
AR4 values. Per Ipieca, the preferred source for GWP factors is
the IPCC’s AR4. 36*

Exhibit 23. The 2022 global average refining carbon intensity
was 33 kg CO₂e/boe

Carbon intensity of refining: Generally, more-complex refineries
are more carbon-intensive per unit of throughput than simpler
refineries. More-complex refineries also have the ability to produce
more higher-value products like gasoline, diesel and jet fuel. The
IEA estimates global carbon intensity supply stacks for refining on
a throughput basis (Exhibit 23).

100

75th percentile
39 kg CO2e/boe

Kilograms CO2e/boe

80

Chevron, 2022
37 kg CO2e/boe

60

50th percentile
27 kg CO2e/boe

25th percentile
23 kg CO2e/boe

40

20

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

mmboe/d
Source: IEA, The Oil and Gas Industry in Net Zero Transitions, iea.org/reports/the-oil-and-gasindustry-in-net-zero-transitions, License: CC BY 4.0.

* As part of the IPCC review process, climate change scientists regularly review the GWP of different
greenhouse gases and update their perspective on the current scientific consensus of the GWPs.
Governments and industry then often use these GWPs in the development of their greenhouse
gas inventories. The AR4 100-year Global Warming Potential (GWP 100) assigns a GWP of 25 to
convert the mass of methane to its CO₂e value. AR5, released in 2014, assigns a GWP 100 of 28.
AR6, released in 2021, assumes a GWP 100 of 29.8 for fossil fuel sources of methane.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
35

90

3.4 prices: near term and long term
We analyze near- and long-term commodity prices with climate
change policies and other regulatory and policy impacts. We utilize
various quantitative methods to combine our supply-and-demand
views and solve for equilibrium commodity prices at which the
marginal producer can enter the market and still earn a reasonable
rate of return (Exhibit 24).

Exhibit 24. Price is set where supply crosses demand
Equilibrium
demand

commodity-price forecasts
Our comprehensive, proprietary forecasts of commodity prices
significantly influence our strategic and business planning.
Because price is determined in a competitive marketplace,
scenarios are used to reflect market uncertainties, generating
multiple price trajectories. Our price outlooks include carbonprice forecasts and cover a wide range of oil prices, natural gas
prices, new energies prices, and costs of goods and services,
among other considerations. These forecasts reflect long-range
effects from population and economic growth, energy mix,
energy efficiency standards, climate-related policy actions,
demand response to prices, technology trajectory, and cost
projection of supplies.

Price

Demand

Equilibrium
price

Margin*
Marginal
producer
Supply
Lowest-cost
producer

Quantity
Note: For illustration only. Not drawn to scale.
Producers with costs lower than the marginal producer – lower and to the left on the blue stack –
produce more and have larger margins than the marginal producer, in yellow. Producers with costs
higher than the marginal producer – higher and to the right on the gray supply stack – typically
would not develop assets.
* Margin is shared between all parties involved in production.

Near term: Markets are primarily characterized by the existing
fixed capital stock, which was determined by past capital
investment decisions. Generally, because production cannot
respond quickly to changes in activity levels, near-term prices are
a function of available production, spare capacity and near-term
demand conditions. For a new conventional oil field, “first oil” may
take three to 10 years, depending on multiple factors, including
the asset type and regulation. Tight oil has shorter development
times; however, as discussed on page 31, uncertainties about shale
operators’ access to capital could limit tight oil’s impact on nearterm prices.

difference between carbon
price and carbon cost
Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, a
“carbon price,” a “carbon cost,” and a “shadow” or “proxy”
carbon price are different. For example, the term “carbon cost”
is sometimes used to refer to carbon pricing and sometimes
used to refer to the societal impacts from carbon emissions.
A shadow or proxy carbon price is a hypothetical, aggregated
price of carbon, which may include estimates for nonpricing
regulations, published for investment analysis purposes.
For us, the term “carbon price” refers to an external price
resulting from a policy like a carbon tax or cap-and-trade
system, and for us, a “carbon cost” is generally a function of a
jurisdiction-specific carbon-price forecast and asset-specific
characteristics that represent the cost for compliance the asset
would face. Like oil price forecasts, the proprietary information
and the analysis that go into carbon-price forecasts and carboncost calculations are important to our strategy. Disclosure of
our carbon-price forecasts or carbon-cost calculations could
compromise commercially and competitively sensitive information. Consistent with our proprietary oil and gas price forecasts,
we do not disclose our carbon-price forecasts or carbon costs.
We support a carbon price.

Long term: Competitive markets are characterized by mobility
of capital investment. Over the long term, prices are determined
where long-term supply and long-term demand curves intersect at
a point that reflects the marginal operating costs, the investment
costs on both the supply side and the demand side, and a minimum
rate of return.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
36

section 4

portfolio
4.1 upstream .................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 38
4.2 downstream .......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 44
4.3 new energies .......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 46

Photo: A worker analyzing a CO₂ capture system. Chevron and Svante
are collaborating to demonstrate Svante’s carbon capture technology at our
San Joaquin Valley operations near Bakersfield, California.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
37

section 4: portfolio
the future of energy
We will continue to maintain flexibility in our portfolio and seek
investment opportunities to achieve superior shareholder value
in any business environment. Our approach seeks to create value
by driving returns across our portfolio of advantaged assets as
we strive to be more capital-, carbon- and cost-efficient.

4.1 upstream
We strive to ensure our upstream business provides competitive
returns, regardless of commodity prices. We are focused on
improving return on capital employed and expanding cash and
earnings margins by operating reliably, managing costs, growing
attractive positions and completing major capital projects under
construction. We are focused on achieving these outcomes while
continuing to lower the carbon intensity of our operations.
Our upstream portfolio is anchored by key assets, including oil in
Kazakhstan, LNG in Australia, shale and tight oil onshore U.S. and
Argentina, deepwater assets in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, and natural

gas in the Eastern Mediterranean. These assets are complemented
by other competitive assets globally (Exhibit 25).
We believe that the most appropriate approach for measuring
the emissions performance of an upstream asset is GHG intensity
by commodity on an equity basis – the same method we use
to report production – which covers all emissions from both
company-operated and nonoperated joint ventures. This is aligned
with the intent to provide useful GHG information to stakeholders.
Based on a comparison of the IEA’s The Oil and Gas Industry in
Net Zero Transitions data, we estimate that more than 65% of our
production of both oil and gas is below the global average carbon
intensity for each commodity.
The Permian Basin continues to deliver higher returns, production
growth and lower carbon intensity. In 2023, we are running four
grid-powered rigs and one natural gas-driven hydraulic fracturing
spread. Approximately 40% of our grid-supplied power will be
from wind and solar. In the deepwater, we have a robust portfolio
that’s delivering strong returns with lower carbon intensity.
Our Australian assets shipped a record number of LNG cargoes
in 2022 as Gorgon and Wheatstone together delivered firstquartile reliability.

Exhibit 25. A diverse and advantaged upstream portfolio*

Americas
~1,400 mboe/d for 2022

International
~1,600 mboe/d for 2022

* Production values shown are for 2022.
Shaded countries represent locations
where upstream has a presence.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
38

Exhibit 26. Upstream net zero 2050 aspiration
Scope 1 and 2 emissions (kilograms CO₂e/boe)
Potential Scope 1 and 2 reduction opportunities
2016
Emissions
intensity

2016
Emissions
intensity

Achieved

40
Portfolio

30

GHG
reductions

Future
Innovation
GHG
and
reductions
offsets

Net zero

Source type

Reduction strategies

Supporting policy

Direct
energy use:
combustion

Energy management, e.g.,
efficiency improvements,
lower carbon fuels,
electrification with lower
carbon power, CCUS

Carbon pricing, carbonrelated reporting,* support
for innovation like CCUS
and offsets, support for
carbon markets†

Flaring

Gas market development,
operational best practices, e.g.,
flow assurance for gas, facility
reliability improvements

Infrastructure support for
gas market development

Fugitives
and venting

Methane management, e.g.,
operational best practices
and facility design

Flexibility to use advanced
technologies for methane
detection

Indirect energy
use: imported
electricity and
steam

Energy management, e.g.,
efficiency improvements,
sourcing lower carbon power

Carbon pricing, carbonrelated reporting,* support for
innovation like CCUS, support
for grid infrastructure

(Divestments)

20

10

0
2016

2016–2022

Projected

2023–2028

Projected

2029–2050

Projected

2050

We aspire to reach net zero upstream emissions (Scope 1 and 2)
by 2050 (Exhibit 26). Accomplishing this depends on continuing
progress on commercially viable technology, government policy,
successful negotiations for carbon capture and storage and
nature-based projects, availability of cost-effective, verifiable
offsets in the global market, and granting of necessary permits by
governing authorities.
We are taking actions to reduce carbon intensity by high-grading
the portfolio, improving operations and using the MACC process to
drive emissions reductions on existing facilities. For new facilities,
we have identified opportunities to adjust our standards and pilot
new technologies with the aim of lower-emission facility design for
future production.
Active portfolio management is key to achieving our objectives.
Growth or decline in production from different assets or
acquisitions and divestitures or from changes in operations and
accounting guidelines may result in emissions performance
changes (Exhibit 26). Contrary to what some may believe,
divestments represent a very small portion of achieved reductions.
We assess reduction opportunities in the key areas of energy
management; methane management, consisting of venting,
fugitives and flaring reductions; CCUS; and offsets. Any source of
emissions can be offset with natural or technological removals,
like nature-based solutions and CCUS. These GHG reduction
approaches can be supported by policy on carbon pricing, welldesigned carbon-related reporting, support for technologies like
CCUS, and offsets.

* See page 62 on carbon-related reporting.
† See page 61 on carbon markets.

Most of our direct emissions (Scope 1) and indirect emissions
from imported energy (Scope 2) are related to energy use, which
can be reduced by energy management, for example, efficiency
improvements or fuel switching to lower carbon sources (e.g., from
diesel to gas).
The next-largest source category of our direct emissions
(Scope 1) is from activities related to methane, including flaring,
fugitive emissions and venting. Flaring can be reduced by
development of gas markets to enable gas takeaway capacity.
We believe fugitive emissions can be addressed with reduction
strategies like leak detection and repair (LDAR) programs
and satellite monitoring and can be supported by policies for
equipment performance standards. Venting can be reduced by
pressure-management systems.
We have identified over 120 GHG abatement projects to advance
to execution and plan to spend more than $350 million on these
projects in 2023. In 2022, we made progress on 90 projects and
completed 13. We expect to spend approximately $2 billion on
similar projects through 2028. When completed, the opportunities
are expected to deliver approximately 4 million tonnes of
emissions reductions per year.
Based on the IEA’s weighted global average of gas production used
in electricity, we estimate 37 that the potential avoided emissions*
associated with natural gas sold by Chevron, relative to coal, may
enable 100 million tonnes of CO₂e reductions per annum by 2030.
* Chevron estimated avoided emissions associated with the share of its global natural gas sales
utilized for electricity generation using an attributional lifecycle approach (World Resources Institute
[WRI], 2019). The avoided emissions were calculated as the difference between lifecycle GHG
emissions associated with the reference product (i.e., coal-based electricity generation) and the
assessed product (i.e., natural gas-based electricity generation). The WRI working paper on avoided
emissions can be accessed at ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/2023-03/18_WP_ComparativeEmissions_final.pdf.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
39

energy management
Emissions associated with our own energy use make up approximately
70% of our direct emissions (Scope 1) and indirect emissions from
imported energy (Scope 2),* which is why energy management is a key
focus area. We are working on over 100 energy management projects
forecasted to reduce emissions by more than 1.5 million tonnes of CO₂e
per year once fully implemented. In addition to our internal efforts,
we support external efforts, including venture capital investments, to
contribute to the advancement of energy management. For example,
we have a long-standing collaboration with the University of California at
Davis Energy and Efficiency Institute sponsoring industry research and
technology advancement in energy and energy efficiency solutions.
Our strategy to deploy mature, renewable power-generation solutions is
focused and selective. We invest in wind and solar projects that have the
greatest ability to cost-efficiently lower carbon emissions in our operations.

TOTAL
TOT_21_00008_TotalEnergies_Logo_CMYK
JFB

30-34 Rue du Chemin Vert 75011 Paris
+33 (0)1 85 56 97 00 www.carrenoir.com
TONS RECOMMANDÉS

CYAN

MAGENTA

We are increasing the use of renewables in a number of our products as
we aim to reduce lifecycle emissions and work to provide verified, low-cost,
high-integrity carbon offsets to our customers around the world to help
them achieve their own lower carbon goals.
Renewable power: By sourcing more electricity from renewable sources,
we are switching to a lower carbon power source and working toward
optimizing between purchased and self-generated power. These types of
efforts can reduce the direct and indirect emissions associated with our
operations and lower the overall lifecycle carbon intensity of our products.
Energy storage: Energy storage is an important component to help
address intermittency with renewable generation. By combining energy
storage solutions with lower carbon power sources, we can lower the
overall carbon intensity of our products.

Ce ﬁchier est un document
d’exécution créé sur Illustrator
version CS6.

Date : 26/05/2021

TECHNIQUE

YELLOW

Algonquin: Chevron and Algonquin Power & Utilities Corporation seek to
co-develop renewable-power projects that provide electricity to strategic
assets across our global portfolio. Under the four-year agreement, we plan
to source 500 megawatts of existing and future electricity demand from
renewables and expect to make up to $250 million in investments by 2025.
TotalEnergies Renewables USA: Chevron and TotalEnergies Renewables
USA completed construction in 2020 on a solar power project that supplies
our Lost Hills production facilities in California with solar energy. We
expect that the project will provide more than 1.4 billion kilowatt-hours of
solar energy over the potential 20-year term of the agreement.

Malta: Chevron is invested in Malta Inc., a startup that is developing a longduration energy storage system targeting eight-hour to multiday storage
for grid-scale applications. Our investment in Malta supports innovation in
the future of energy storage. Its technology has the potential to efficiently
and cost-effectively create a scalable long-term energy storage system
that can support renewables as they potentially become a greater portion
of the future energy mix.

RayGen: Chevron is invested in RayGen, a startup developing
technology that has the potential to impact long-duration energy
storage and grid stability.

*Year-end 2022.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
40

methane management
We believe addressing methane emissions has become a key part of being
a responsible producer of oil, products and natural gas. Chevron’s ambition
is to be a global leader in methane emissions performance.
Our upstream methane-intensity target is 2.0 kg CO₂e/boe by 2028, and
we have reduced the methane intensity of Chevron’s oil and gas operations
by more than 50% since 2016. OGCI, of which Chevron is a member, has a
2025 collective methane intensity target of well below 0.2% of marketed
gas from operated assets. In 2022, our upstream methane intensity
performance was estimated at 0.13% of marketed gas production from
operated assets and 0.17% of marketed gas production on an equity
basis.* In 2021, our methane intensity performance in the Permian Basin
production segment was in the top quartile of oil and gas producers.
In 2022, Chevron committed to designing, where possible, new upstream
facilities without routine methane emissions. We flare natural gas when
necessary for safety and operational purposes and in areas where pipelines
and other alternatives for transporting gas do not exist. During development planning in the Permian Basin, we consider gas takeaway availability
as if it were a permitting condition. This approach has resulted in limited

The Environmental Partnership (TEP): Chevron is a founding partner of
TEP, an industry initiative aimed at accelerating the adoption of practices
that reduce methane emissions. The over 100 companies participating in
this initiative have conducted nearly 1.9 million leak detection surveys and
replaced more than 114,000 pneumatic controllers with lower- or nonemitting technologies or otherwise removed them from service.
Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI): Chevron is a member of OGCI.
Member companies have a methane-intensity target to help reduce collective average upstream methane intensity to well below 0.20% by 2025,
measuring the volume of methane emissions from upstream oil and gas
operations as a percentage of the total volume of gas marketed.
Veritas: Chevron has joined Veritas, the GTI Energy Methane Emissions
Measurement and Verification Initiative. The goal of Veritas is to develop
and advance technical protocols for measurement and assurance to
provide a widely accepted methodology to incorporate field-informed
methane quantification into emissions inventories. In summer 2022,
Chevron tested and provided technical feedback on the protocols. Chevron
is continuing to test and provide feedback on the first official version of the
protocols, which were made public in February 2023.
Project Astra: Chevron participates in Project Astra, a methane sensor
network that leverages data sharing and analytics to provide nearcontinuous monitoring across some oil and gas facilities in the Permian
Basin. Project Astra is led by the University of Texas at Austin.

flaring during emergency and upset conditions. Our Angola LNG joint
venture was built to provide access to a market for associated natural gas.
We have reduced flaring intensity from our operated assets in Angola by
more than 80% since 2016.
Chevron is trialing emerging technology and collaborating with third
parties to help find better ways to detect and measure methane emissions.
Improving our methane detection capabilities helps us better identify
emissions reduction opportunities. We anticipate that our methane emissions monitoring and detection program will provide additional insights to
improve how our facilities are operated and maintained.
Chevron is taking actions to improve the quality and transparency of
methane emissions disclosures. As quantitative technologies become
more widely available and protocols are developed to reconcile current
inventories with actual measurements, we are working to incorporate field
measurement into existing emission factor-based inventories.
Read more about Chevron’s strategy, goals and action plan to prevent,
detect and reduce methane emissions at chevron.co/methanereport.

Collaboratory to Advance Methane Science (CAMS) and Methane
Emissions Technology Evaluation Center (METEC): Chevron is a founding
member of CAMS and also serves on the Industrial Advisory Board of the
METEC, a facility at Colorado State University (CSU) that provides realistic
oil field settings to test new methane detection technologies. Our CAMS
projects include an aerial survey in the Permian Basin, a review of satellite
monitoring capabilities and a measurement study of emissions from LNG
transport activities. Other projects include TOPBOT, where researchers will
work to close the gap between top-down and bottom-up methane emissions estimates, and development of AI-based software to help improve
quantification and localization capabilities of point methane sensors.
Chevron has supported CSU’s methane work over the past two years by
engaging in the Colorado Coordinated Campaign (C3), which has sought
to build emissions models of the Denver-Julesburg Basin by incorporating
data from flyovers, ground-based emissions measurement and the
Methane Emissions Estimation Tool model. Chevron is also supporting
CSU’s Site Air Basin Emissions Reconciliation (SABER) project, which is
working to demonstrate reconciliation between top-down and bottom-up
estimates of emissions in a complex oil and gas production basin.

* While we are including this methane metric to allow for comparability with other reporting
frameworks, we continue to use kg CO₂e/boe for our methane metric because it allows for allocation
of emissions between multiple products of the same operation (oil, gas, NGLs) and is more useful for
comparing different types of assets.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
41

methane strategy in action
Our goal is simple – keep methane in the pipe. This starts with
designing and operating facilities to help prevent methane
emissions and includes deploying technologies to validate
performance, inform repairs and improve inventories.
A proactive strategy to design and operate facilities can lead
to meaningful reductions in methane emissions intensity.
Detection and measurement can help assess whether operations
are functioning as designed or identify leaks and other areas
for improvement. Trialing emerging technology lets Chevron
explore what is possible and incorporate innovative solutions
into our methane management programs over time. We anticipate that our monitoring and detection program will provide
additional insights to improve how our facilities are operated
and maintained.

Design and operation
To evolve facility designs, process controls and systems are being
reengineered to help remove, reduce or prevent methane venting
as part of our normal operations.
We have completed several projects at the Ashdod Onshore
Terminal in the Eastern Mediterranean, such as converting
instrument gas to instrument air, connecting a tank with natural
gas blanketing to a vapor recovery system and converting a facility
vent stack natural gas purge to nitrogen purge.
In Nigeria, we have changed how we manage flaring at the Agbami
deepwater production facility. Historically, when a compressor
went down for any reason, gas would be routed to the flare system
to support continued oil production. However, through focused
technical applications, equipment reliability and effective flares
management, we have significantly reduced flaring arising from
process upsets while optimizing production.
Our assets in Colorado have reduced methane emissions by
implementing an intermittent gas lift project. Gas lift compressor
total horsepower has been downsized by operating gas lift on wells
intermittently instead of full time.

Find and fix
Since 2016, we have trialed 14 advanced methane detection
technologies. “Find and fix” campaigns in Angola, Argentina,
Australia, Kazakhstan, Nigeria, the Denver-Julesburg Basin,
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and the Permian Basin have provided
opportunities to test different methane emissions detection and
measurement options (Exhibit 27). Detection results were used
to validate performance and inform repairs.
In 2022, Chevron contracted GHGSat to monitor up to 22 onshore
assets worldwide. At one asset, an investigation of satellite
detection results found dry gas that had been diverted to a highpressure flare to assist in decreasing or eliminating dark smoke
emissions per local regulatory requirements. To resolve this,
the dry gas was diverted to a low-pressure flare with a highpressure assistance procedure for smoke reduction. In testing
following the conversion, no methane emissions from flaring
were found.
Chevron’s 2022 LDAR program in the Denver-Julesburg Basin
consisted of more than 2,000 optical gas imaging (OGI) camera
inspections and more than 30,000 auditory, visual and olfactory
(AVO) inspections. Each facility was visited multiple times
throughout the year for the purpose of identifying potential
emissions sources. The majority of detected emissions sources
were repaired at the time of inspection.
In late 2022, we led a 20-day drone campaign offshore Angola.
We also completed a similar 22-day drone campaign for our
onshore and offshore assets in Nigeria. Findings from these
surveys inform our project priorities and emissions inventories for
our Angola and Nigeria operations.
Shared learning
Chevron, as an OGCI member, has supported OGCI’s pilot program
from late 2021 to mid-2022 to deploy GHGSat at six sites in Iraq.
The program seeks to identify methane plumes and directly
engage with local operators to help address the causes. OGCI is
working to expand the pilot to additional sites in Iraq, as well as
Algeria, Egypt and Kazakhstan, as an introduction to methane
monitoring services.
Chevron signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Egyptian Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources to share
best practices and expertise related to the reduction of methane
emissions. Chevron plans to provide study tours and workshops
to build awareness of technologies, measurement practices and
examples of projects to reduce emissions.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
42

Exhibit 27: Methane detection technology in our operations
technology type*
satellites

capability
• Detection thresholds
range from
25,000 kg/hr to
100 kg/hr

benefits
• Potential to be the
lowest-cost option by site
• Helpful in identifying
super-emitters

• Monthly to daily global
coverage

current challenges

example operations

• Detection thresholds are
high and restrict detection
to very large sources

Block 0/14, Angola

• Limited in producing
facility-scale resolution

El Trapial, Argentina

• Does not work on cloudy days
• Struggles with detection
over water and identifying
the emitter with multiple
operators nearby

Eastern Mediterranean, Israel

Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG, AU
Tengizchevroil, Kazakhstan
Permian Basin, U.S.

• Needs accurate local wind
data for quantification

aircraft

• Detection thresholds
range from 50 kg/hr
to less than 3 kg/hr

• Leading service providers
can likely capture most
facility emissions

• Scale of hundreds of
sites per day

• Not all technologies
provide specific source or
emission size information,
meaning additional
detection is needed to
identify the source

Denver-Julesburg Basin, U.S.
Permian Basin, U.S.
Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG, AU
Vaca Muerta, Argentina
Gulf of Mexico, U.S.

facility-scale periodic
monitoring
(drone or mobile lab)

• Detection limits of
less than 1 kg/hr are
possible with the right
wind conditions and
site access

• Ability to scan an entire
site, including areas
that would otherwise be
difficult to reach with
handheld devices

• Scale of tens of sites
per day in onshore
applications

facility-scale nearcontinuous monitoring
(fixed cameras, sensors, etc.)

• Detection limits
vary with the sensor
placement and wind
conditions and range
from 25 kg/hr to less
than 1 kg/hr
• Equipment is fixed at
one site or location

manual leak detection
(handheld screening like OGI
and EPA Method 21)

• Detection limits
vary based on
environmental
and human factors
but are generally
characterized at less
than 1 kg/hr
• Scale of a few sites
per day

• Field application requires
individual site visits and
travel time between sites
or platforms
• Challenges near electrical
power lines and near
airports for drones
• Weight of the emissions
sensors can reduce battery
life and limit flight time
for drones

• Potential for 24/7 site
coverage
• Could have uses beyond
methane detection
• May provide information on
the duration of intermittent
sources

• Ability to identify
exact location of a source
of emissions
• Third-party services
available in locations with
regulatory programs
• Potential to incorporate
into emissions reporting
for fugitive components
• Current industry and
regulatory approach

Agbami/Delta, Nigeria
Block 0/14, Angola
Denver-Julesburg Basin, U.S.
Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG, AU
Gulf of Mexico, U.S.
Permian Basin, U.S.

• Research and development
is needed to scale this
approach

Denver-Julesburg Basin, U.S.

• Generally need precise
wind data to interpret
detection results

Tengizchevroil, Kazakhstan

• Labor-intensive

Block 0/14, Angola

• Travel time between sites

Denver-Julesburg Basin, U.S.

• Human and site factors
impact results

Eastern Mediterranean, Israel

• Does not quantify
emissions
• Can be difficult to reach
elevated sources with
handheld detection tools

Permian Basin, U.S.

Wheatstone LNG, AU

Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG, AU
Gulf of Mexico, U.S.
Permian Basin, U.S.
San Joaquin Valley, U.S.
Tengizchevroil, Kazakhstan
El Trapial, Argentina

* Since 2016, Chevron has trialed 14 advanced methane detection technologies. Trials have included multiple projects with seven continuous monitoring
devices: Project Canary (Canary X), Scientific Aviation (ChampionX) SOOFIE®, Honeywell Gas Cloud Imaging (GCI and Mini GCI), Aeris MIRA Ultra Mobile LDS,
Quanta3 and Qube (Axon). Trials have also involved four aerial survey vendors, Bridger Photonics, Kairos Aerospace, NASA JPL (AVIRIS-NG) and GHGSat; two
drone-based solutions from SeekOps and DJI (U10); and a satellite provider, GHGSat.
AU = Australia

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
43

Commercial use
Completed or ongoing pilot
Planning stages

4.2 downstream

Exhibit 28. Optimizing downstream value
chains to maximize value

We seek to grow earnings across the downstream value chain by
making targeted investments in higher-return segments while
strengthening our refining and marketing value chains. These
investments are designed to strengthen our value chain, improve
cost competitiveness and meet evolving customer needs. We
continually examine ways to meet demand and policy changes.
Chevron’s downstream portfolio is focused in areas of
manufacturing strength on the U.S. West Coast, the U.S. Gulf
Coast and in Asia-Pacific (Exhibit 28). We have created tightly
integrated value chains in the markets where we operate and are
well positioned to supply our customers. As our focus is on value,
not volume, we expect to continue to improve our operations,
lower carbon intensity and grow margins. In our petrochemicals
business, our portfolio focus is on world-scale facilities, proprietary
technology and low-cost feedstocks.
Complex refineries play an important role in transforming
crude into high-value products. This process tends to have a
higher carbon intensity when measured on a throughput basis,
sometimes referred to as a “simple barrel” basis. Based on data
from the IEA’s The Oil and Gas Industry in Net Zero Transitions,
over 40% of our refinery capacity is below the global average of
refinery throughput carbon intensity, which is expected when
using a throughput basis and taking into account our portfolio
of complex refineries.

U.S. West Coast
United States

Richmond

Salt Lake

El Segundo

Mexico

To Central America

U.S. Gulf Coast
Pascagoula
Pasadena

Central
America

Lower carbon intensity of transportation fuels
Chevron is creating a portfolio of renewable fuel options,
like renewable diesel and biodiesel, in policy-enabled markets.
We believe an approach that embraces all forms of technologies
and solutions is critical to achieving climate and air quality
policy goals with transportation options that are affordable
and accessible to everyone. We conducted demonstrations for
policymakers across the United States to showcase our renewable
gasoline blend that can reduce lifecycle carbon intensity by more
than 40% compared with traditional gasoline. We are working in
California’s policy-enabled markets to scale biofuels, hydrogen,
and renewable natural gas fuel solutions and technologies.
We are also pursuing opportunities to lead in other markets where
similar policies are expected and are exploring multiple consumer
offerings, including EV charging at retail stations.

Colombia

Asia-Pacific

South Korea

Thailand

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Australia
Products and intermediaries

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
44

renewable fuels
We are developing compressed natural gas (CNG), renewable natural
gas (RNG), hydrogen, renewable diesel (RD) and biodiesel (BD). We
have integrated renewable base oil into our lubricants product lines. We
co-process biofeedstock in our own facilities, collaborate with others to
produce and procure RNG, and market the RNG volumes for use in vehicles
operating on CNG.
Processing biofeedstock: Sixty percent of our U.S. terminals are now
capable of renewable or biodiesel distribution. With the renewable diesel
project in Geismar, Louisiana, expected online in 2024, our renewable fuels
capacity will increase by 30%. Leveraging our existing refining system and
other anticipated actions, we are targeting production capacity of roughly
100 mbd of renewable diesel, sustainable aviation fuel, biodiesel and
other biofuels by 2030. By building off the capabilities and assets of our
new organization, Chevron Renewable Energy Group, we are halfway to
achieving our 2030 capacity target.

Brightmark: Chevron and Brightmark LLC have formed Brightmark RNG
Holdings LLC, a joint venture to develop projects across the United States
to produce RNG. The joint venture funds the construction of infrastructure
and the commercial operation of dairy biomethane projects in multiple
states, from which we purchase RNG and market the RNG volumes for use
in vehicles operating on CNG.
Getting to Zero Coalition: Chevron has joined more than 160 companies
in the Getting to Zero Coalition, an industry-led platform for collaboration
that brings together stakeholders from across the maritime and fuels value
chains with the financial sector and others. The coalition is committed to
getting commercially viable deep-sea zero-emission vessels powered by
zero-emission fuels into operation by 2030 toward full decarbonization by
2050. It is managed by the Global Maritime Forum, who initially founded
the coalition together with the World Economic Forum and Friends of
Ocean Action.
CalBio: Chevron has partnered with CalBio and dairy farmers to form
CalBioGas LLC, a joint venture to produce and market dairy biomethane
as an RNG transportation fuel in California. These efforts mitigate dairy
methane emissions and reduce waste. In 2020, we began producing RNG
at dairy farms in the California Central Valley.

RNG and CNG: RNG and CNG projects capture methane that would
otherwise be emitted to the atmosphere and turn it into a valuable fuel,
with negative carbon intensity on a lifecycle basis under the California
Low Carbon Fuel Standard. Our primary focus is to develop lower lifecycle
carbon intensity gas from renewable sources at dairy farms with the scale
and proximity to natural gas pipelines to enable commercial projects.
We expect to diversify our feedstock mix over time, likely to include
wastewater and landfill gas. We aim to grow production of RNG to
40,000 million BTUs per day by 2030.
Renewable base oil: To date, we have a portfolio of patents, including
some that target fuel economy, EV fluids and equipment life extension,
all using renewable base oil. Chevron’s renewable base oil and renewable
lubricant are available in the market today.
Renewable fuels are important products that can help reduce the lifecycle
carbon intensity of transportation fuels today while meeting the world’s
growing energy needs.

Bunge: Chevron and Bunge North America, Inc. have formed Bunge
Chevron Ag Renewables LLC, a joint venture leveraging Bunge’s expertise
in oilseed processing and farmer relationships and Chevron’s expertise in
fuels manufacturing and marketing. The 50-50 joint venture is intended
to help us meet the demand for lower lifecycle carbon intensity fuels and
develop renewable fuel feedstocks. It also is anticipated to establish a
reliable supply chain from farmer to fueling station and double the current
facility capacities from 7,000 tons per day by the end of 2024.
Airports of Tomorrow: Chevron is a member of Airports of Tomorrow
(AoT), which consolidates the lower carbon aviation work previously done
by the World Economic Forum through its Clean Skies for Tomorrow (CST)
and Target True Zero initiatives. AoT is working to accelerate aviation’s
energy transition, including hydrogen propulsion, scale-up of biofuel and
SAF, and new innovations in technology. Joining the AoT – and being a
member in 2022 of its predecessor CST – supports our efforts to advance a
lower carbon future by increasing the availability of fuels in sectors where
emissions are harder to abate.
Beyond6: Chevron has acquired full ownership of Beyond6, LLC (B6)
and its network of 55 CNG stations across the United States. With this
acquisition, we can market the RNG we either produce or procure through
a nationwide network of CNG locations.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
45

Exhibit 29. Aiming to grow lower carbon businesses
Achievement of the ambitious goals set out in this section
depends on the development of policy and regulatory support,
technological advancement, and the granting of necessary
permits by governing authorities.

2030
targets

4.3 new energies
We are building businesses in renewable fuels, CCUS and offsets,
hydrogen, and emerging technologies (Exhibit 29). We believe
we can build competitive advantages and target sectors of the
economy that cannot be easily electrified. Chevron has a long
history of advancing and adopting external innovation. Our goal
is to help customers meet their lower carbon ambitions and
reduce the carbon intensity of our own operations while pursuing
opportunities that generate attractive returns.

we believe innovation,
technology and policy will be
key drivers of change
We begin with a portfolio of Chevron’s existing assets, deep
technical expertise and decades of experience as a strong
foundation for future growth. Our assets are in markets where
we can meet growing demand based on cost-competitive supply
combined with appropriate policy support. Our relationships
with key customers and partners will be critical in developing
economic projects that can scale across a complex value chain.
We have strong commercial capabilities and experience managing
rapidly changing businesses. Managing diverse stakeholder and
government interests is something we do every day, and we’ve
successfully managed complex joint ventures all over the world.
Chevron’s credibility and reputation make us the partner of choice,
bringing access to new opportunities.

100 mbd
renewable fuels
production capacity

25 mmtpa
offsets business and CCUS

150 mtpa
hydrogen equity
production capacity

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
46

carbon capture, utilization
and storage and offsets
We believe that CCUS and carbon offsets are important to achieving global
net zero and to our aim of accelerating progress toward the lower carbon
ambitions of our company and customers.
Chevron is working to develop and deploy CCUS technologies. Our strategy
is twofold: lower the carbon intensity of our existing assets and grow a
CCUS business that helps reduce emissions of the industries that enable
modern society. Nature-based solutions, including those quantified via
offsets, can be an important carbon sink.

We are growing a carbon offsets business to meet a range of internal and
external needs. This includes investing in compliance markets where we
are regulated and providing solutions for our customers to help achieve
their emissions reduction goals. We have a global trading organization and
actively invest in scalable solutions – like soil carbon storage, reforestation
and mangrove restoration – to build a portfolio of high-integrity credits.

TE C HNOLOGY TO ACHIE VE ‘NE T Z E RO ’

Bayou Bend CCS: Chevron has a membership interest in the Bayou Bend
joint venture with Talos Energy and Equinor. Bayou Bend is a CCS project
along the Texas Gulf Coast. In early 2023, the project was expanded to
cover nearly 140,000 acres of geological formation both onshore and
offshore, which has a gross potential storage resource of over 1 billion
tonnes of CO₂. The expansion helps position Bayou Bend to be a CO₂
transportation and storage provider for industrial emitters in and around
the Houston Ship Channel and the Beaumont/Port Arthur area.
Eastridge CCS Project: Chevron plans to reduce the carbon intensity
of our Central California operations by installing post-combustion carbon
capture equipment to capture CO₂ and store it thousands of feet underground. This potential CCS project will begin at our Kern River Eastridge
cogeneration plant in Kern County, California.
Australia GHG assessment permits: Chevron is part of three joint ventures
that have been granted an interest in three offshore GHG assessment
permits. The permits authorize us to explore an area covering nearly
7.8 million acres – an area larger than Belgium – for potential GHG storage
formations or injection sites.
Kern River Carbon Capture Project: Chevron, Svante and the U.S.
Department of Energy National Energy Technology Laboratory (project
#DE-FE0031944) are piloting technology that captures CO₂ from our Kern
River facility in San Joaquin Valley, California.

Carbon Sync: Chevron has invested with Carbon Sync, a soil carbon
farming project developer, to develop soil sequestration projects in
Western Australia. Through holistic management and regenerative farming
practices, Carbon Sync aims to improve soil health, enhancing its ability to
capture and sequester carbon. Our investment with Carbon Sync intends
to provide critical learning and insight related to the commercial and
technical aspects of soil carbon projects.
Carbon Clean: Chevron is invested in Carbon Clean, a carbon capture
company providing solutions for hard-to-abate industries. As part of the
investment, Chevron and Carbon Clean are seeking to develop a carbon
capture pilot for Carbon Clean’s CycloneCC™ technology on a gas turbine
in San Joaquin Valley, California.
Restore the Earth Foundation: Chevron is participating in a reforestation
project for up to 18,800 acres, planting approximately 3.7 million trees
in St. Charles Parish, Louisiana. The project brings together Chevron and
Restore the Earth Foundation to develop a nature-based solution, with an
aim to generate 4.7 million tonnes of carbon offsets through the reforestation of natural cypress forests in St. Charles Parish.
International Emissions Trading Association (IETA): Chevron is a member
of IETA, a nonprofit created to establish an international framework for
trading in GHG emissions reductions. IETA members seek to develop an
emissions trading regime that results in real and verifiable GHG emissions
reductions, while balancing economic efficiency with environmental
integrity and social equity. Chevron is also a founding member of IETA’s
Markets for Natural Climate Solutions Initiative, which draws on the power
of nature to actively manage land use emissions, remove carbon from the
atmosphere and store it in natural systems.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
47

hydrogen
We believe the use of lower carbon intensity hydrogen as a fuel source
or feedstock can help reduce the amount of GHG emissions entering
the atmosphere.
We are developing a lower carbon hydrogen and ammonia business
where Chevron can build competitive advantages over time, focused on
heavy-duty transport, power and other hard-to-abate sectors. Supply
opportunities are centered in three core regions: U.S. West; Texas and U.S.
Gulf Coast; and Asia-Pacific.
Chevron has decades of knowledge and experience with hydrogen.
We are pursuing commercial opportunities to develop technology, build
infrastructure, connect supply chains and grow the hydrogen market,
which are all key components to deliver hydrogen at scale.

ACES Delta: Chevron has a majority interest in the Advanced Clean Energy
Storage Delta (ACES Delta) electrolytic hydrogen production and storage
project in Delta, Utah, with operations planned by mid-2025. The project
is expected to initially produce up to 100 tonnes per day of electrolytic
hydrogen and will utilize salt caverns to store the energy.
Solar-to-hydrogen project: Chevron aims to use existing solar power, land
and produced water from Chevron’s San Joaquin Valley assets to produce
electrolytic hydrogen.
U.S. Gulf Coast: Chevron is collaborating with Air Liquide, LyondellBasell
and Uniper on a joint study to evaluate and potentially advance the
development of a hydrogen and ammonia production facility. The facility
could support industrial carbon reduction and mobility applications in
the U.S. Gulf Coast region and expand clean ammonia exports, helping to
increase the supply of lower carbon power internationally. Chevron is also
a founding member of the HyVelocity Hub, comprised of leading energy
companies and organizations working to accelerate the development of
hydrogen hubs in Texas, Southwest Louisiana and the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Iwatani: Chevron has an agreement with Iwatani to co-develop and
construct up to 30 hydrogen fueling sites in California by 2026.
Raven SR and Hyzon: Chevron is collaborating with Raven SR and Hyzon
to commercialize operations of a solid waste-to-hydrogen generation
and production facility in Richmond, California, intended to supply lower
carbon hydrogen fuel to transportation markets in Northern California.

Chevron previously held patents on nearly 70 inventions from early
commercial ventures that are applicable to our future development plans.
Currently, Chevron has filed patent applications or holds granted patents
on approximately 20 inventions. We produce approximately 1 million
tonnes of hydrogen per year for use in our refining operations. Further,
we have the potential to supply and sell hydrogen to customers from
our existing refineries by leveraging our distribution capabilities, sales
channels and brands. We are currently building hydrogen fueling stations
at select locations.
Our capabilities in CCS can position us to build natural gas-based, lower
carbon intensity hydrogen, leveraging our upstream assets in several
regions. We are investing in demonstration projects and innovative
technology startups that can help lower the cost and carbon intensity
of hydrogen production and delivery.

Pertamina New & Renewable Energy and Keppel: Chevron signed a joint
study agreement with Pertamina and Keppel to explore the development
of select lower carbon hydrogen and ammonia projects using renewable
energy located primarily in Sumatera, Indonesia.
Zero Emission Industries (ZEI): Chevron is invested in ZEI, a developer of
hydrogen fuel cell power systems for the maritime industry.
Aurora Hydrogen: Chevron is invested in Aurora Hydrogen, a developer
of hydrogen production technology that uses microwave energy without
generating any CO₂ emissions or consuming water.
Syzygy Plasmonics: Chevron is invested in Syzygy, a developer of lower
carbon hydrogen technology.
Hydrogenious LOHC Technologies: Chevron is invested in Hydrogenious,
a developer and provider of liquid organic hydrogen carrier technology.
Hydrogenious’ technology has the potential to unlock the economic value
of hydrogen through lower transportation, storage and distribution costs.
Caterpillar: Chevron and Caterpillar have a collaboration agreement to
develop hydrogen demonstration projects and stationary power applications, including prime power. We also are working with Caterpillar-owned
Solar Turbines to adapt a low-emissions turbine engine partially fueled by
hydrogen. Blending hydrogen with traditional fuels to power the engine
could help reduce its GHG emissions.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
48

emerging technologies
We have a long history of identifying and driving innovation through
investments in emerging technologies, research and development, and
university partnerships. We are currently exploring opportunities to
commercialize the next generation of emerging technologies. These
efforts will build on our assets and capabilities to meet growing enterprise
and customer needs.
Initially, we are leveraging core capabilities in subsurface, drilling, wells
and facilities, and our operating history in geothermal, to advance and
scale novel geothermal energy, which can potentially allow access to a

Baseload Capital: Chevron is invested in Baseload Capital, a private investment company focused on the development and operation of low- and
medium-temperature geothermal and heat power assets. We also have a
joint venture with Baseload to develop geothermal projects in the U.S., the
first of which is in Weepah Hills, Nevada.
Eavor Technologies: Chevron is invested in Eavor Technologies, a
company that provides a closed-loop geothermal technology for both
power and direct heat markets. Eavor’s innovative system has dispatchability for power load balancing, which is becoming more essential as
intermittent renewables become a larger part of power grids.
Mitsui Oil Exploration Company (MOECO): Chevron announced the
signing of a joint collaboration agreement to explore the technical and
commercial feasibility of advanced geothermal power generation in Japan.
Building on Chevron and MOECO’s long-standing relationship, the new
collaboration will study geothermal resource potential across Japan and
will evaluate the effectiveness of advanced closed-loop technology for a
future joint pilot project there.

widespread baseload, nonintermittent resource that can complement and
add capacity to meet the world’s growing renewable-power demand.
In addition to geothermal, we are exploring other emerging lower carbon
power technologies, such as lithium extraction. Technologies such as
long-duration storage or small, modular nuclear reactors can be part of
the solutions needed to deliver on the world’s growing demand for lower
carbon energy. Through venture capital, we continue to invest in other
lower carbon technologies.

Sonoma Clean Power: Chevron is working with Sonoma Clean Power to
identify and develop geothermal opportunities in Sonoma and Mendocino
counties, California.
Texas Geothermal Energy Alliance (TXGEA): Chevron is a member of
TXGEA, an education and advocacy organization created to enhance
geothermal energy in Texas.
Zap Energy: Chevron is invested in Zap Energy, a startup developing
a next-generation modular fusion energy system with an innovative
approach to advancing cost-effective, flexible and commercially scalable
fusion power.
Mainspring Energy: Chevron is invested in Mainspring Energy, a startup
developing technology that has the potential to enable greater fuel flexibility and utilization of lower carbon fuels with near-zero NOx emissions.

integrated partnerships
We are collaborating in new ways with innovators, policymakers, communities and customers to accelerate progress toward integrated lower carbon
products and solutions that can help reduce emissions of industries that
enable modern society.

JERA: Chevron and JERA are collaborating on multiple lower carbon
opportunities focused on the U.S. and Asia-Pacific regions. Opportunities
include the production of lower carbon fuels, CCUS and new technology
commercialization.

KazMunaiGas (KMG): Chevron has a memorandum of understanding
to explore potential lower carbon business opportunities in Kazakhstan
with KMG. Chevron and KMG have been evaluating the potential for lower
carbon projects in areas such as CCUS, hydrogen, energy efficiency and
methane management, and carbon financial disclosure methodology.

PT Pertamina: Chevron has collaborated with PT Pertamina (Persero) to
explore potential lower carbon business opportunities in Indonesia. Aimed
at serving local and potentially regional customers, we plan to consider
novel geothermal technologies; carbon offsets through nature-based
solutions; CCUS; and lower carbon hydrogen development, production,
storage and transport.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
49

section 5

performance
and policy
5.1 assessing performance on a lifecycle basis ..................................................................................................................................................... 51
5.2 policy ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 54

Photo: Workers on a rig near Carlsbad, New Mexico. Our Permian Basin
operations are among the lowest methane emissions per site of any operator.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
50

section 5: performance and policy
to drive the most pragmatic policy, incentivize producers to
abate more, inform buyers on making lower carbon choices in a
standardized manner and identify more cost-efficient emissions
reduction options.

measuring and advocating
for what matters

We need to advance lifecycle assessment. Corporate GHG
emissions inventory reporting has been around for approximately
20 years. 38 Emissions inventory reporting developed from the
top down, starting with global calculated emissions moving to
national calculations and then, more recently, corporate reporting.
The more we can integrate a lifecycle approach, the more we can
improve decision making across specific value chains.

To advance an orderly transition to a lower carbon future,
we believe GHG emissions (carbon) data and policies that
incentivize capital markets and customers to make rational
choices are needed. In 2022, over 70% of Chevron’s equity
direct emissions were covered by mandatory GHG reporting
programs and more than 50% of our direct emissions were in
regions with existing or developing carbon-pricing policies.
Chevron actively engages with stakeholders to advance lifecycle
analysis and works with governments to help implement
well-designed climate policies. We aim to find common ground
among stakeholders and companies with varying views to
achieve a lower carbon future for all.

Absolute reporting emissions provides insight into company size,
sector or types of activities in which a company engages. Intensityor performance-based reporting is useful for assessing relative
carbon efficiency, or carbon performance, of different suppliers
of products and services for similar activities (Exhibit 31). Being
able to assess, quantify and communicate carbon performance in
a standardized way across the lifecycle of products and services
can help promote reduction activities and policies. Steps have been
made by some jurisdictions in assessing carbon performance using
intensity data, which can be a building block to a lifecycle analysis,
also known as “carbon footprinting.”

5.1 assessing performance on a lifecycle basis
The world is not on track to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement* and needs better data to enable better decisions to
advance these goals. Chevron believes lifecycle analysis (LCA) is a
powerful tool to enable data-driven decisions. A lifecycle approach
to carbon accounting facilitates informed decision making
throughout the value chain. Carbon data that is consistent, reliable
and transparent across sectors, products and firms of all sizes can
be used to understand the carbon performance associated with
a good or service at each stage of the lifecycle, from production
to manufacturing to transport (Exhibit 30). Aggregating the data
enables a full lifecycle assessment that can improve decision
quality at each point at which policy, manufacturing or purchasing
decisions are made. Such an approach could enable policymakers

5.1.1 Standardized lifecycle accounting for emissions,
reductions and removals would enable more complete and
comparable data and enable standardized assessments of
carbon performance relative to alternatives.
Actual: Primary data are key to differentiating between product
suppliers. Primary data – via methods specific to the underlying
product, process and supplier – are needed to assess the relative

Exhibit 30: It is important to assess carbon performance for comparable stages in the lifecycle

production
25
kg CO2e/boe

+

transport
5
kg CO2e/boe

+

manufacturing
37
kg CO2e/boe

+

transport
5
kg CO2e/boe

+

use
420
kg CO2e/boe

=

lifecycle
emissions
492†
kg CO2e/boe

* The UN Environment Programme’s Emissions Gap Report 2022, unep.org, shows that the world is not on track to meet the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to well below 2° C, preferably 1.5° C.
† Illustrative values are based on production and manufacturing values from Chevron’s oil and refining carbon intensities, respectively, as stated on page 66 in Chevron’s GHG reporting equity metrics and targets
table; transport value based on Chevron internal analysis of IEA, World Energy Outlook 2018, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2018; end-use value from API, GHG Compendium (2021), api.org.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
51

performance of multiple suppliers of the same product and to
incentivize performance improvements.
Allocations: A consistent allocation approach is important
to ensure comparability of product-level emissions. The
inherent bias imposed by allocation choices can lead to potential
“methodology arbitrage” wherein one product appears superior
based solely on accounting choices. When more than one product
is produced at a facility, there are multiple ways to allocate
emissions across products – based on quantity, mass, energy or
economic value at various levels of granularity, including regional,
facility or process unit – all of which result in different values for a
carbon footprint.
Consistency in allocation decisions can facilitate comparability. For
example, in mining gems, both gems and waste rocks result. Some
propose that all emissions resulting from mining activities should
be allocated to the gems, as they are the primary economic value
driver of the mine. However, others propose that the emissions
should be distributed to both the gems and the waste rocks
based on the proportional volume produced given the physical
processing. Chevron believes it is important to consider both
the economic value and physical processing requirements when
allocating emissions across products from the same facility.
Attribution: Effective use of carbon attributes can harness
market forces to promote carbon efficiency at the least cost to
society. GHGs are global in nature, having the same impact on
climate change no matter where emissions occur.* Therefore, in the
pursuit of the Paris Agreement goals, GHG emissions reductions
could be encouraged no matter where they occur and as costefficiently as possible. One way to achieve this is to decouple
the carbon performance of a product or service via the creation
of an environmental attribute paired with another product. This
system, sometimes referred to as “book-and-claim,”† enables one
party to incentivize and claim an emissions reduction even if the
reduction physically occurs elsewhere.

chevron was an early adopter
of emissions reporting
For more than 20 years, Chevron has reported, at the company
level, both direct emissions and the largest category of its
indirect emissions (combustion of our products). We recently
achieved reasonable assurance‡ of our corporate inventory.

There are many reasons that avoidance, abatement or removal may
be undertaken by a different party. For example:
• Lower cost of avoidance, abatement or removals.
• Products may be commingled in storage or transport, which
makes tracing differentiated products impossible (common in
energy products).
• Local markets for a lower carbon activity may not exist, and
shipping of the physical products – when and if possible – to
markets that value carbon efficiency may increase overall
carbon emissions.
• Entities with the desire to fund emissions reductions may be
geographically separated from the lower-cost carbon emissions
reduction, in which case, decoupling environmental attributes
enables broader access to markets, which can accelerate a more
cost-efficient lower carbon future. 39
Consistent methodologies that track both physical and contracted
carbon performance are needed to enable efficient markets,
ensure emissions are counted once and enable effective
reconciliation of emissions.

Exhibit 31: Differences between absolute emissions reporting and intensity- or performance-based reporting
term

definition

uses

absolute emissions
reporting

Total emissions emitted
over a period of time, usually
associated with an activity,
product or area

• Indicates relative size of business
• Drives absolute emissions reductions through operational and design changes
• Incentivizes divestment, shutdowns and reporting methodology arbitrage

intensity- or performancebased reporting

Emissions divided by
production or energy units

•
•
•
•

Establishes a normalized performance measure
Provides insight on carbon efficiency
Drives absolute reductions through operational and design changes
Incentivizes more carbon-efficient production growth

* Other reasons, such as local air criteria pollution, may influence location of emissions, but the emissions still contribute to climate change. The impact is global, not local.
† A number of regulatory and nonregulatory programs use this practice, such as in renewable fuels and renewable electricity.
‡ “Reasonable assurance” refers to a high level of confidence that stated information is accurate and complete, allowing a verifier to conclude that the GHG information is fairly stated, contrasted with no

assurance or limited assurance. “Limited assurance” refers to a negative form of conclusion which allows verifiers to conclude that nothing has come to their attention to cause them to believe that GHG
information is misstated. For our most recent ESG assurance statement, visit chevron.co/ESGassurance.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
52

lifecycle carbon accounting
A more effective and reliable lifecycle approach to carbon accounting
and associated digital tools are necessary to advance a lower carbon
future. Chevron continues to invest, directly and through partnerships,

in advancing lifecycle carbon accounting and developing critical
digital products, such as for lifecycle tracking and tracing to create
data to inform policies, capital markets and customers.

THE OPEN GROUP

FORUM

123Carbon: Chevron worked with 123Carbon to complete an “insetting,”
or reductions from within a company’s value chain, pilot by tokenizing the
bunkering of biofuel for Chevron-owned vessels in Singapore. 123Carbon
was founded to accelerate the decarbonization of transportation and
provides a blockchain-based platform to create insets derived from
multimodal low carbon transport.
Smart Freight Centre (SFC): Chevron collaborated with other stakeholders on the development of market-based approaches to decarbonize
transportation through SFC. SFC, a nonprofit organization focused
on reducing GHG emissions from freight transportation, publishes the
approaches in their Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for
Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting.
Xpansiv and CMS: Chevron collaborated with Carbon Management
Solutions (CMS) and Xpansiv to pilot a lower carbon fuel oil transaction
that provides auditability and traceability for fuel oil in Singapore on a
blockchain-based asset ledger. CMS is a decarbonization platform built
for the commodities market, and Xpansiv is a market infrastructure
provider for registering, managing, trading, settling, retiring, analyzing
and reporting data-driven environmental commodities.
Open Footprint Forum: Chevron is collaborating with other stakeholders
through the Open Footprint Forum. The Open Group is a global consortium
that enables the achievement of business objectives through technology
standards, using the Open Footprint Forum to create a common model
for footprint-related data covering all types of emissions, consumptions
(e.g., water, land, energy) and base calculations to normalize and
aggregate data.
ISO 6338: 2023 Method to Calculate GHG Emissions at LNG Plant:
Chevron collaborated with other stakeholders through IOGP, an
international industry association of oil and gas producers, and through
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), an independent,
nongovernmental organization with a membership of 168 national standards bodies, to develop a method to calculate the GHG emissions from an
LNG liquefaction plant, onshore or offshore.

The Statement of Greenhouse Gas Emissions (SGE)
Methodology: Chevron collaborated with Pavilion Energy and
QatarEnergy on developing the SGE, a published methodology to quantify
the GHG emissions associated with a delivered LNG cargo. It provides a
measurement, reporting and verification methodology that complements
common GHG reporting processes to deliver a consistent, verified SGE for
each delivered LNG cargo.
Pathfinder Framework: Chevron collaborated in the Partnership for
Carbon Transparency (PACT) with stakeholders across the value chain,
in an effort facilitated by the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD), to develop the Pathfinder Framework. It was
created with the aim of addressing the existing challenges to data transparency. It seeks to help businesses develop a better understanding of the
carbon emissions of their products and empower smart, carbon-informed
decision making by encouraging and guiding the exchange of primary
carbon footprint data across value chains. The framework provides
supplementary guidance for accounting, verification and exchange of
cradle-to-gate product carbon footprints, with the aim of creating more
granular, comparable and consistent emissions data.
Pathfinder Network: Through the WBCSD and PACT, Chevron is
collaborating with stakeholders from across the value chain and technology
companies to develop technical specifications for the standardized
exchange of carbon emissions data. Based on Pathfinder Framework
guidelines, the specifications will, for the first time, allow different
emissions and accounting tech solutions to connect to and understand
each other, making it easier for businesses to access data.
E-liability: Chevron is working with the E-liability Institute to pilot and
develop a report applying E-liability’s carbon-accounting approach. The
aim is to produce accurate and auditable data for both direct and indirect
emissions. E-liability Institute is a not-for-profit with a mission to rapidly
ramp up adoption of the E-liability method and to communicate learnings
with corporations, universities and the public sector.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
53

5.2 policy

we believe policy should
empower markets to incentivize the
most cost-efficient GHG abatement,
avoidance and removals
We support the goals of the Paris Agreement. We believe policy
should drive the most efficient and cost-effective abatement
economywide, along with natural and technological emissions
removals. Narrow sectoral or geographic approaches are less
efficient than broad economywide solutions, which are better
able to incentivize more efficient and cost-effective reductions.
Chevron supports a price on carbon, applied as widely and broadly
as possible, as the best approach to reduce emissions. We work to

encourage national policies to support international linkages
(e.g., through Article 6 of the Paris Agreement), with the
goal of ultimately establishing a liquid and integrated global
carbon market.
Individual companies contribute to achieving the goals of the
Paris Agreement through their participation in policies that may
be included in the NDCs of the countries in which the companies
operate (Exhibit 32). We work with governments to encourage
well-designed policies, such as carbon pricing and encouraging
the most efficient and least carbon-intensive producers of goods
and services. Most energy forecasts agree that oil and gas will
continue to be a significant source of energy – even in a net
zero scenario – for years to come. We believe that transparent
performance reporting will enable the market to reward the most
carbon-efficient producers.

Exhibit 32. Nearly all countries have endorsed the Paris Agreement, and many are supporting net zero ambitions

Endorsed
Endorsed
Paris
Paris
Agreement
Agreement
Endorsed
Endorsed
Paris
Paris
Agreement
Agreement
and
and
government
government
support
support
forfor
netnet
zero
zero
ambitions
ambitions
As of September 2023.
Sources: United Nations Treaty Collection, treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.
aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-7-d&chapter=27&clang=_en; United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, unfccc.int.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
54

Many economists believe the most efficient way to achieve
economywide emissions reduction is through a price on carbon.41
We agree. Carbon pricing incentivizes reductions across the
economy and investment in reduction technologies for the future.
A price in the form of either a tax – which sets a price on
emissions – or a cap-and-trade system – which sets the volume
of emissions reduction – can incentivize solutions within a
market-based framework, strengthening and compounding its
comparative advantages over time (Exhibit 34). In addition, a
carbon tax could raise revenue that may be invested or returned to
impacted communities and consumers.
The wider the coverage of a price, the more opportunities to
find carbon reductions. For example, for economies that are
not members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), it is often less expensive to reduce
emissions because investment may not have been made in more
efficient technologies. By linking OECD and non-OECD economies,
financing can be mobilized to incentivize reductions at the lowest
cost. It is estimated that with global cooperation (e.g., through the
Paris Agreement), reductions can be made at half the cost of an
inefficient and unlinked system.42
Policies narrowly targeted at specific geographic regions,
sectors or technologies are likely to miss the efficiencies of a
comprehensive market-based system. The impact of a targeted
approach may be a reordering of the MACC opportunities – by
shifting a higher-cost activity to the left on the graph (Exhibit 35).
This typically achieves less emissions reduction, at any given cost.

Cost, $/tonne CO2e

Quantity, tonnes CO2e

Efficiency, maintenance

Forestry, agriculture,
waste management, industry
Other technologies
Exhibit
34.
In
markets
with
carbon
pricing, the carbon cost often
CCS
Renewable power

follows the cost of abatement in the market†
Demand 1

Price 1

Quantity, tonnes CO2e

Efficiency, maintenance

Forestry, agriculture,
waste management, industry
Other technologies
Exhibit
35.
In
markets
with
narrowly
targeted policies,
CCS
Renewable power

abatement opportunities may be reordered†

Demand 2

Demand 1

Price 1
Price 2

Quantity, tonnes CO2e

Efficiency, maintenance
* Construction of a MACC requires detailed understanding of a wide range of technologies and
mitigation options across the various sectors of the economy. Numerous decisions are also
necessary, such as the grouping of technologies and the choice of discount rate, which can affect
both the volume and the cost calculations. MACCs should be taken as qualitative, rather than
quantitative, representations of the costs and potential magnitudes of mitigation options unless
done with facility- and project-specific information.

Demand 2

Price 2

Cost, $/tonne CO2e

Each bar represents one category of mitigation opportunity.
The height of each bar represents the cost of abatement, generally
expressed in a cost per tonne of carbon dioxide-equivalent
(CO₂e), and the width of each bar represents the volume of
abatement, usually in tonnes of CO₂e. Generally, efficiency and
some renewable-power applications are less costly than natureand land-based reductions, which are generally less costly than
CCUS and other technologies still in early development. Potential
carbon reduction costs and volumes can also vary by geography
or application.40

Exhibit 33. A MACC can be a helpful organizational framework
for policy analysis and abatement-potential analysis†

Cost, $/tonne CO2e

Policy organizational framework: Given the scale of the global
challenge to address climate change, allocation of resources as
efficiently and effectively as possible is critical to creating the
greatest progress. Curtailing emissions at the lowest cost per
tonne, irrespective of where or in which sectors those abatements
occur, is the most economically efficient approach. Such efforts,
grouped by category, can be ordered by cost of the reduction on
a per-tonne basis in a graphical representation (Exhibit 33), often
referred to as a “marginal abatement cost curve,” or MACC.*

Renewable power
CCUS

Forestry, agriculture,
waste management, industry
Other technologies

† For illustration only. Not drawn to scale. Example of a marginal abatement cost curve;
project ranking represents average prices, but specific projects within categories vary.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
55

Supply

Exhibit 36. Approximately 50% of global daily oil production
crosses borders
(mmbd)

1.1
3.8
1.2

0.9

2.2

1.0

1.1

3.6

1.8

4.
1

14.7

1.4

Although carbon pricing is generally regarded as the most
efficient way to reduce emissions,43 governments may want to
support innovation by investing in technologies that, through
commercialization, could unlock further reduction opportunities
even though they are currently more expensive and have a socalled “green premium.” This term refers to the “additional cost
of choosing a clean technology over one that emits a greater
amount of greenhouse gases.” 44 Similarly, targeted policies are
sometimes helpful for addressing instances in which a desirable
reduction activity would not otherwise occur because of a barrier.
For example, although efficiency projects often are economic, the
entity that needs to invest in the reduction activity may not be the
same entity that receives the benefit from the investment (e.g., in
situations that involve leased equipment).

0.5

0.
7

Policy impacts: The timing, scope, scale and design of policies to
support the goals of the Paris Agreement will vary and could have
direct and indirect impacts on the company. Policies can change
the amount of energy consumed, the rate of energy-demand
growth and the relative economics of one fuel versus another.
Examples include:
• Efficiency improvements are expected to have the largest
impact on moderating energy-demand growth (e.g., consumers
purchase vehicles, appliances or homes that are more efficient).
Efficiency policies are often some of the most cost-efficient on a
per-tonne basis. Read more about our actions on efficiency
on page 40.

Exhibit 37. Virtually all LNG produced crosses borders
(mmtpa)

18.7

56.0

18.4

15.4

2.9

2.6
5.3

.6

21

• Carbon pricing and fuel taxes can increase the cost of fossil fuels
and can affect the relative economics of the fuel mix. In addition,
carbon pricing can incentivize the most carbon-efficient
producer of a particular product. Read more about our approach
to carbon pricing on page 36 and our approach to carbonefficient production on page 39.

Source: S&P Global Commodity Insights, 2022 Crude Oil Market, ihsmarkit.com.

3.6

• Technology mandates, like renewable fuel and portfolio
standards and EV mandates, can override the economics of
different energy sources and may change the energy mix. Read
more about our actions on renewables on pages 40 and 45.

2.8

5.7

2.7

• Policy design in major demand centers and markets is
increasingly important because of impacts on the relative
economics of fuel choices, particularly for those that trade in
global markets (Exhibits 36 and 37). Carbon border adjustment
mechanisms, which are applied in carbon-pricing programs, and
import requirements under renewable fuels mandates to prevent
offshoring of emissions to other jurisdictions (also known as
“leakage”), can raise the cost of an imported product. Impact is
often tied to the carbon intensity of the product’s production.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
56

56.3

4.0

29.2

Source: Cedigaz, 2022 LNG Flows, cedigaz.org.

74.9

83.8

direct policy cost impact analysis
The extent to which a policy can affect commodity prices and margins depends on the ability to
recover the costs in the marketplace (Exhibits 38–41). Many jurisdictions take this into consideration
in the context of local production and refining trade competitiveness.
Exhibit 38. Policy applied to producer below the marginal
producer leads to the least ability to recover costs*

Exhibit 39. Policy applied to the marginal producer leads to
some ability to recover costs*

If a policy is applied to a single producer or jurisdiction,
the cost can erode margins and may make the supply,
refining or sale uncompetitive.

If a policy is applied to the marginal producer, the commodity price
can rise to recover a portion of the cost or to the level at which the
next producer becomes the marginal producer, whichever is less.

Equilibrium
demand

Equilibrium
demand 2

Demand

Equilibrium
demand 1

Demand

Equilibrium
price

Margin

Price

Price

Equilibrium
price 2

Policy cost

Equilibrium
price 1

Margin
Policy cost

Supply

Supply

Previous low-cost producer is
displaced by new low-cost producer

Quantity

Quantity

Exhibit 40. Policy applied to all producers leads to the greatest
ability to recover costs*

Exhibit 41. Policy applied to all producers; production efficiency
incentivized and leads to the ability to recover more than costs*

If a policy is applied to all producers by the same amount per unit
of production, the cost of supply rises, thus enabling the greatest
cost-recovery potential; however, less total supply is needed.

If a policy cost is applied to all producers by the same amount per
tonne of emissions, such as via a performance benchmark, those
producers with more-efficient production have a greater ability to
recover costs, which may increase margins even though less total
supply is needed. Conversely, less-efficient producers may incur
higher costs and be priced out of the market.

Equilibrium
demand 3

Equilibrium
demand 3

Equilibrium
demand 1

Demand

Demand
Equilibrium
price 3

Margin

Equilibrium
price 1

Policy cost

Price

Equilibrium
price 3

Price

Equilibrium
demand 1

Equilibrium
price 1

Margin
Policy cost

Supply

Supply

Quantity

Quantity
* For illustration only. Not drawn to scale.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
57

Exhibit 42. Carbon-pricing mechanisms are in place or under development in 39 national and
33 subnational jurisdictions around the world, in many of which we operate

$48

$91
$33
$91
$96
$33

$48

$48

$48

$48
$48
$60
$48
$123
$60

$15

$30

$15

$1

$48 $88

$123
$30

$88$96

$1

$1
$1

$13

$49

$7

$49

$94

$4

$4

$8

$5

$8

$5

$5
$12
$4

$5
$5
Existing with
with
Existing
established price
price
established

$3
$3

$9$9

$5
$12

$5

$5

$7

$94

$13

$11

$5$2$9
$5 $9
$9

$11
$2

$9

$4

$11 $11

$34 $34

Under development
development
Under
Source: Chevron analysis: The World Bank, Carbon-Pricing Dashboard, March 2023, carbonpricingdashboard.worldbank.org.

In 2022, more than 50% of our equity direct
emissions were in regions with existing or
developing carbon-pricing policies.
Australia Our upstream facilities are regulated
by the federal Safeguard Mechanism in effect
since 2016, which caps facility-level emissions
and requires emissions above this cap to be
offset, creating an indirect carbon-pricing
policy. As of March 2023, the price for an offset
was $11/tonne.
California Our upstream oil assets, refineries,
and refined gasoline and diesel sales are
regulated under a cap-and-trade policy in effect
since 2013. In upstream and refining, allowance
allocations are aligned with a performance
benchmark to consider competitiveness of
trade-exposed industries. Distributors of transportation fuels, natural gas and other fuels have
been covered since 2015. As of March 2023, the
price for an allowance was $30/tonne.
Oregon Our refined gasoline and diesel sales
are regulated under the Climate Protection
Program in effect since 2022. Allowances are
allocated free according to cap declining rates;
emissions above allocated levels can be met
with Community Climate Investment credits,
which are set at $123/tonne for 2023.
Washington Our refined gasoline and diesel
sales are regulated under a cap-and-invest
policy that took effect in 2023. As of March
2023, the price for an allowance was $60/tonne.

Canada Federal The government implemented
a carbon tax of $15/tonne (CAD20) in 2019
that will increase to $150/tonne (CAD170) in
2030, which may be met with an equivalent
program at the provincial level. The federal
price acts as a backstop and is applied in
provinces not deemed equivalent to provincial
pricing programs.
Alberta Our joint venture upstream assets
are subject to the carbon price of $48/tonne
(CAD65) in 2023. A performance benchmark
for large emitters was established under
the Technology Innovation and Emissions
Reduction Regulation program in 2020 and is
designed to protect trade-exposed industries.
Newfoundland and Labrador Our joint venture
assets in Newfoundland and Labrador are
subject to a performance-based large-emitter
program which is part of a carbon-pricing
program that tracks the federal program.
Colombia Our fuel supplies, along with others
sold in the country, are subject to a carbon
tax in effect since 2017. The tax is $5/tonne
in 2023. The tax liability can be met using
offsets, but the percentage was reduced to
50% starting from 2023. Most developed offset
projects are related to reducing emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+)
and hydroelectric. Chevron has participated
in this compliance program since its inception
and has purchased 12.3 million tonnes of CO₂e
reductions to meet our in-country obligations.

Italics indicates a policy is under development.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
58

European Union Our Oronite plant in France is
regulated under the EU cap-and-trade system
in effect since 2005. Allowance allocations
are aligned with a performance benchmark to
consider the competitiveness of trade-exposed
industries. As of March 2023, the price for an
allowance was $96/tonne.
Kazakhstan Our joint venture upstream assets
are regulated under a cap-and-trade policy in
effect since 2013. Allowance allocations are
aligned with a performance benchmark to
consider the competitiveness of trade-exposed
industries. As of March 2023, the price for an
allowance was $1/tonne.
Singapore Our joint venture refinery and
Oronite additive facility are subject to a carbon
tax in effect since 2019. The tax is $4/tonne
for 2023.
South Korea Our joint venture refinery is regulated under a cap-and-trade system in effect
since 2015. Allowance allocations are aligned
with a performance benchmark to consider the
competitiveness of trade-exposed industries.
As of March 2023, the price for an allowance
was $11/tonne.
Others Jurisdictions such as Brazil, Israel
and Thailand are analyzing or developing
carbon-pricing programs. Coverage and other
details regarding these programs are still under
consideration. China’s national emissions
trading scheme started in 2021 but currently
covers only the power sector.

we believe it is a competitive advantage to
already operate in a lower carbon policy environment
We have direct exposure to carbon pricing via our operations in some of these jurisdictions.
We also operate in areas (Exhibit 43) that incentivize low-carbon intensity via GHG regulations
such as low-carbon fuel standards.
biofuels
Australia Renewable-fuel-blending mandates
in the state of New South Wales, in effect since
2007, and in the state of Queensland, in effect
since 2017, apply to all fuel suppliers and require
that volumes of biofuels be blended into diesel
and gasoline fuels.
Colombia A renewable-fuel-blending mandate,
in effect since 2001, applies to all fuel suppliers
and requires that volumes of biofuels, if available
domestically, be blended into motor fuels.
Indonesia A renewable-fuel-blending mandate,
in effect since 2006, applies to all fuel suppliers
and requires that volumes of biofuels be blended
into gasoline and diesel fuel.
Malaysia A renewable-fuel-blending mandate, in
effect since 2006, applies to all fuel suppliers and
requires that volumes of biofuels be blended into
diesel fuel.

Philippines A renewable-fuel-blending mandate,
in effect since 2007, applies to all fuel suppliers
and requires that volumes of biofuels be blended
into gasoline and diesel fuels.

California A low-carbon fuel mandate, in effect
since 2011, applies to all fuel suppliers and sets
carbon intensity standards for gasoline, diesel
and the fuels that replace them.

South Korea A renewable-fuel-blending
mandate, in effect since 2012, applies to all fuel
suppliers and requires that volumes of biodiesel
be blended into diesel fuel.

New Mexico Discussion and efforts are underway
to establish a clean fuels program.

Thailand A renewable-fuel-blending mandate, in
effect since 2007, applies to all fuel suppliers and
requires that volumes of biofuels, if available, be
blended into gasoline and diesel fuel.
U.S. Federal A renewable-fuel-blending
mandate, in effect since 2006, requires the
introduction of increasing volumes of biofuels
into the U.S. fuel supply. This obligation applies
to all refiners and importers of gasoline and
diesel fuels.

Oregon A low-carbon fuel mandate has been in
place since 2016. This is in addition to existing
renewable-fuel-blending mandates applicable to
all fuel suppliers, in effect since 2009.
Washington A low-carbon fuel mandate went
into effect in 2023. This is in addition to existing
renewable-fuel-blending mandates applicable to
all fuel suppliers, in effect since 2008.
Vietnam A renewable-fuel-blending mandate,
in effect since 2018, applies to all fuel suppliers
and requires that volumes of ethanol be blended
into gasoline.

methane
Canada Federal Our upstream operations are
included in existing methane regulations for
the oil and gas sector that were developed in
2018. In 2022, Environment and Climate Change
Canada began public consultations on regulatory
designs to meet a new goal for sectoral methane
emissions reductions of 75% by 2030 from a 2012
baseline. A final rule is expected in 2024.
Kazakhstan Our upstream operations are
subject to the Environmental Code, which
includes provisions for the phased adoption
of Best Available Techniques (BAT) across
multiple sectors. In 2022, a draft directory on
BAT for oil and gas production was circulated for
stakeholder comment.
Nigeria Our upstream operations are subject to
the Nigerian Upstream Petroleum Regulatory
Commission guidelines for the management
of methane and other GHG emissions in
the upstream oil and gas sector, released in
November 2022. The guidelines are designed
to support Nigeria’s emissions reduction

targets, including the elimination of routine
flaring by 2030 and a 60% reduction in methane
emissions from the sector by 2030, relative to a
2020 baseline.
U.S. Federal Our upstream operations are
subject to proposed rule revisions to New Source
Performance Standards (NSPS) and Mandatory
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP)
Subpart W that will add and modify requirements
to new and existing regulated sources. The
proposed NSPS OOOOb will require modifications to LDAR programs for new and modified
facilities, among other requirements. The
proposed OOOOc will direct states to implement
rules on existing sources in the oil and gas sector.
Our U.S. operations are affected by sections of
the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act, which directs
the EPA to impose and collect a charge on
methane emissions that exceed segment-specific
thresholds in the domestic natural gas value
chain, beginning for reporting year 2024. The
EPA has issued proposed regulation potentially
significantly affecting the GHGRP.

Italics indicates a policy is under development.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
59

California Our upstream operations are subject
to a methane rule that requires LDAR, storage
tank controls and controls for other equipment.
Most requirements have been in effect since 2018
and apply to both new and existing facilities.
Colorado Our upstream operations are subject
to methane rules that require LDAR, storage tank
controls and controls for other equipment. The
rules apply to new and existing facilities and have
been in effect since 2014. Updates in 2020 added
emissions monitoring requirements on new flowback operations. Updates in 2023 added GHG
emissions inventory verification requirements.
New Mexico Our upstream operations are
subject to natural gas waste reduction rules
that establish a statewide enforceable regulatory
framework to secure reduction in oil and gas
emissions and prevent the waste of natural gas
from new and existing sources, such as targeting
volatile organic compounds and methane reductions as a co-benefit.

Exhibit 43. From mandatory reporting requirements to renewable portfolio standards to carbon capture
regulations, policy-enabled markets are advancing around the world

Norway
Kazakhstan

United
Kingdom

China
European
Union
United
States

California

South Korea

Singapore

Brazil

Australia

United States

Brazil

United Kingdom

Kazakhstan

Singapore

Australia

Renewable power
• 100% carbon-free
electricity target by 2035
• $369 billion in funding and
incentives for renewableenergy and low-carbon
initiatives through IRA
Carbon capture
• 45Q tax credit expanded
and extended, providing
up to $85/t for permanent
CO₂ storage and $60/t
for CO₂ industrial uses
Hydrogen
• $7 billion of funding for
regional hydrogen hubs
Mandatory reporting
• SEC has proposed a rule for
climate change disclosure
• EPA GHGRP requires
facility-level emissions
reporting for emissions
>25k tCO₂e

Carbon capture
and hydrogen
• Exploring CCUS for
emissions reduction paired
with blue and green
hydrogen generation from
natural gas and biogas

Renewable power
• 100% renewable-power
target by 2035
Carbon capture
and hydrogen
• $1.3 billion to support
four CCUS clusters
• $145 million to support
hydrogen strategy
• Up to $24.3 billion
allocated to fund the
early deployment of
CCUS, which includes
a $1.2 billion CCUS
Infrastructure Fund
Mandatory reporting
• Emissions Trading Scheme
for industries with
thermal input exceeding
20 megawatts
• Green Taxonomy to allow
two years of voluntary
reporting before
introducing mandatory
reporting
• Companies that have
consumed (in the U.K.)
more than 40,000
kilowatt-hours of energy
in the reporting period
to disclose energy and
carbon information

Mandatory reporting
• Emissions Trading System
for facilities with emissions
>20k tCO₂

Carbon capture
and hydrogen
• Low-Carbon Energy
Research Funding Initiative
awarded $39 million to
low-carbon hydrogen
and CCUS projects, with
planned additional funding
of $91.7 million
Mandatory reporting
• Proposed mandatory
climate-related disclosures,
starting from financial
year 2025
• Carbon Pricing Act charges
facilities with emissions
≥25k tCO₂e at $3.6/tCO₂e,
which increases to $18 in
2024 and $33 in 2026

Renewable power
• Some state- and territorylevel renewable-power
targets of 50%–100% by
2030
Carbon capture
and hydrogen
• Carbon credit units
awarded to CCS operators,
where each unit represents
1 tonne CO₂e stored
• 106 active planned or
operational hydrogen
projects, with 48 more in
the investment pipeline
Mandatory reporting
• Proposed Safeguard
Mechanism reform
requires heavy emitters
(>100k tCO₂e) to cut
emissions by 4.9% per year
• Proposed requirement that
large, listed entities and
large financial institutions
disclose climate risks,
commencing with the
2024/2025 financial year
• National Greenhouse
and Energy Reporting
Act covers facilities with
emissions ≥25k tCO₂e

California
Renewable power
• 90% of energy from
renewables target by 2035
Carbon capture
• CCS projects qualify for
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
credit generation
Hydrogen
• $2.9 billion zero-emission
investment plan includes
$90 million for hydrogen
infrastructure
• 200 hydrogen refueling
stations by 2025 goal
Mandatory reporting
• CARB covers facilities with
GHG emissions >10k tCO₂e
• GHG emissions disclosure
and mandatory reporting
on climate-related
financial risks

European Union
Renewable power
• 40% renewable-energy
mix target by 2030
Carbon capture
and hydrogen
• $3 billion in public funding
for CCS and $5.2 billion
in public funding for
hydrogen
• Up to $41 billion
innovation fund between
2020 and 2030 to scale
up hydrogen and CCUS
projects and other lowcarbon technologies
Mandatory reporting
• Reporting directive for
companies with more than
250 employees, $39 million
turnover or $19.4 million
assets

China
Renewable power
• Increase wind and solar
generation capacity
to 1,200 gigawatts by
2030, with 25% of total
energy consumption from
renewable sources
Hydrogen
• Up to $220 million per
chosen city to build
hydrogen infrastructure
and promote fuel cell
vehicle adoption
• Target fleet of 50,000
hydrogen-fueled vehicles
by 2025
Mandatory reporting
• Emissions Trading
System for power sector
>26k tCO₂e

Norway
Carbon capture
• $1.8 billion to support
Longship CCS project

Source, as modified by Chevron Corporation: consolidation of publicly available information.
Italics indicates a policy is under development.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
60

South Korea
Renewable power
• 20% renewable-power
targets by 2030 and
30%–35% for 2040
Hydrogen
• Roadmap to develop
hydrogen and fuel cell
economy, with $3 billion
in planned investment
• Safety management law
provides legal framework
for government efforts,
including subsidies
• $383 million fund to
promote development of
the hydrogen industry
Mandatory reporting
• Emissions Trading System
for facilities with emissions
>25k tCO₂e

chevron supports
well-designed climate policy

Chevron supports the global ambitions of the Paris Agreement and continues to take actions to help lower the carbon intensity of our
operations while continuing to meet the world’s demand for energy. Chevron believes that broad, market-based mechanisms are the most
efficient approach to addressing GHG emissions reductions.

Chevron supports carbon pricing, innovation and efficient policies. Chevron supports:
• Global engagement: Build up an integrated global carbon market
that creates a level playing field and mitigates trade distortions.
Incentivizing the lowest-cost abatement on the widest scale possible
is critical to mitigating climate change, as it allocates limited resources
as efficiently and effectively as possible to create the greatest
opportunity for success.

Marginal abatement cost curve, promoting carbon
efficiency at the least cost to society
(Quantity, tonnes CO₂e)

• Research and innovation: Support promising pre-commercial
technologies designed to spur innovation and mitigation across all
sectors of the economy. Investments in pre-commercial early-stage
abatement technologies can lead to commercially viable businesses
and ultimately reduce the need for incentives over time.
• Balanced and measured policy: A balanced and measured approach
aims to meet long-term economic, environmental and energy-security
needs; allocates costs in an equitable, gradual and predictable way; and
considers both GHG mitigation and climate change adaptation. Involve
all sectors, technologies and solutions to maximize efficient and costeffective reductions and avoid duplicative and inefficient regulations.
• Transparency: Strive for transparency and efficiency in measuring
and driving the lowest-cost emissions reductions. Transparently
communicate policy benefits, costs and trade-offs to the public.

innovation support
Investments in pre-commercial earlystage abatement technologies can lead
to commercially viable businesses and
ultimately reduce the need for incentives
over time.

carbon pricing
Carbon pricing should be the primary
policy tool to achieve GHG emissions
reduction goals. It incentivizes the most
efficient and cost-effective emissions
reductions when applied broadly across
the economy while enabling support
to affected communities, consumers
and businesses.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
61

targeted policies
Direct regulations should be narrowly
and efficiently targeted to enable costeffective lower carbon opportunities not
addressed by carbon pricing or innovation policies (e.g., apartment efficiency
standards, because the owner pays for
efficiency improvements, but the renter
pays the utility bill).

chevron supports a lifecycle
approach to carbon accounting

The best decisions are made with reliable data. Pursuing a lower carbon future is no different. The world is not on track
to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement* and needs better data to enable better decisions to advance these goals.
Chevron believes lifecycle analysis (LCA) is a powerful tool to enable data-driven decisions.
A lifecycle approach to carbon accounting facilitates informed decision making throughout the value chain. Also known as
“carbon footprinting,” this accounting approach can be used to quantify the carbon intensity associated with a good or service,
inclusive of both direct and indirect emissions. Such an approach could enable policymakers to drive the most pragmatic policy,
incentivize producers to abate more, inform buyers on making lower carbon choices in a standardized manner and identify more
cost-efficient emissions reduction options.

principles

A lifecycle assessment is a comprehensive method for assessing
a range of environmental impacts across the full lifecycle of a
product system, from materials acquisition to manufacturing, use
and final disposition. When focused on carbon emissions, this
approach enables product differentiation by enabling a holistic
comparison of product carbon performance.

• Relevant: Actual data compared on a common basis enables
day-to-day decision making.
• Consistent: Data enable performance comparisons across
suppliers and over time.

Chevron is working within and beyond our sector to help develop
global standards and guidance to advance carbon accounting as
we seek to lead in carbon transparency. Actual data, a standardized
approach to allocating emissions, and single-attribution to avoid
double counting are all needed as the foundation for consistent
carbon accounting.

• Accurate: Common set of assurance standards promotes
the reliability of information.
• Complete: Lifecycle summation, inclusive of all relevant
emissions, and annual global reconciliation of emissions
are achieved.

It is important to assess carbon performance for comparable stages in the lifecycle
Lifecycle emissions are the sum of GHG emissions and removals in a product system expressed as CO₂-equivalents.

production
25
kg CO2e/boe

+

transport
5
kg CO2e/boe

+

manufacturing
37
kg CO2e/boe

+

transport
5
kg CO2e/boe

+

use
420
kg CO2e/boe

=

lifecycle
emissions
492†
kg CO2e/boe

* The UN Environment Programme’s Emissions Gap Report 2022, unep.org, shows that the world is not on track to meet the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to well below 2° C, preferably 1.5° C.
† Illustrative values are based on production and manufacturing values from Chevron’s oil and refining carbon intensities, respectively, as stated on page 66 in Chevron’s GHG reporting equity metrics and targets
table; transport value based on Chevron internal analysis of IEA, World Energy Outlook 2018, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2018; end-use value from API, GHG Compendium (2021), api.org.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
62

chevron supports
policy to advance innovation
and lower carbon solutions

Chevron supports energy policies that incentivize the investment in projects and products that promote new technologies. We believe
carbon pricing should be the primary policy tool to achieve GHG emissions reduction goals. In regions lacking sufficient carbon markets,
government incentives and grants can be useful tools in encouraging a lower carbon future.

If designed properly, incentives, research and innovation, grants,
and public partnerships can be effective policy tools to enable lower carbon
operations and products. Chevron supports:
• A focus on emissions: Public research, development,
demonstration and deployment should be based on opportunity
for scalable emissions reduction, supporting the most promising
pre-commercial opportunities, irrespective of energy source.
• Balanced and transparent government policies: Policy
should be balanced to enable research, development and
demonstration of promising technologies while minimizing
market distortions. Policy should be open to participation and
competition from across sectors and transparent in order to
build public trust and communicate benefits, costs and tradeoffs to the public.

• Pre-commercial support: To maximize limited public resources
and minimize harmful market distortions, innovation policy
should focus on advancing emerging technologies so they
become commercially scalable without subsidy within a carbonpricing program. Incentive-oriented programs should be
designed with the goal of ultimately enabling technologies and
products to compete without government support.
• Scalable solutions: Innovation policy should leverage scientific
research to advance promising technologies that can offer
scalable economic solutions to climate change. Policy should
aim to drive down costs so these opportunities are commercially
scalable and reduce the need for incentives over time.

incentives

research
and innovation

grants and public
partnerships

We acknowledge and support incentives for
nascent technologies and regions lacking
a viable carbon market. Incentives should
be designed with the intent to create cost
competitiveness and scalability for lower
carbon businesses and reduce the need for
incentives over time.

We support policies that promote
research, development and deployment of
technologies to enable scalable solutions,
drive down costs and improve performance.
Investments in pre-commercial technologies
can lead to commercially viable businesses
and ultimately reduce the need for incentives over time.

We believe competitive grant programs,
public-private partnerships or coinvestments in lower carbon technologies
can be useful tools if designed to be
competitive, results-oriented, transparent
and inclusive of appropriate investment
terms. Innovation policy grants should focus
on advancing emerging and pre-commercial
technologies. Grants for existing commercial
opportunities that distort markets and
create unfair competition should be avoided.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
63

participating in methane policy
chevron believes that methane management is critical to a lower carbon future and that methane reductions
are possible through adoption of industry best practices, advancement in measurement technologies, carbon
pricing and methane regulations

We support carbon pricing as the primary tool to most efficiently and effectively enable GHG emissions reductions, including methane.
However, carbon pricing requires robust measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) programs to accurately quantify emissions, and
continued advances in methane measurement technologies and protocols are needed. In jurisdictions where MRV programs for methane
are not robust and mature, we continue to engage on and support effective methane regulations as the transitional policy approach.

chevron supports:

chevron engages:

• MRV programs: Methodologies need detection technology performance
specifications, measurement protocols and verification to ensure
consistent quantification and reporting of methane emissions across all
covered operators and sectors. Currently, there is greater measurement
uncertainty with methane emissions than with CO₂ emissions. A robust
MRV framework will need to balance the use of emission factors,
engineering estimates and advanced technologies.

We believe learning from and sharing best practices within the oil and
gas industry can help improve industrywide methane management.
We engage policymakers and other entities for knowledge sharing on
methane emissions. This includes participation in groups that develop and
share best practices for methane reduction, such as The Environmental
Partnership in the United States and Insitituto Argentino Del Petroleo Y Del
Gas in Argentina, as well as direct feedback on specific policy proposals,
such as in Kazakhstan, Nigeria and the United States.

• Technological innovation: Policy should flexibly incorporate advanced
technologies, such as aerial and drone monitoring, that can detect
and measure methane emissions most effectively, particularly from
super-emitters that have a disproportionate impact on overall
emissions. Policy frameworks should be based on realistic current
capabilities of measurement technologies and encourage further
technology advancement.
• All sectors contributing: Improving methane performance is important
for oil and natural gas, which generate approximately 24% of global
methane emissions, and the other sectors that generate the remaining
76%. Policy should apply to all key sectors.
• Performance-based regulation: When jurisdictions pursue methane
regulations, they should set appropriate methane targets based on
industry best practices, including reasonable minimum equipment
standards, while providing flexibility for companies to determine the
optimal way to meet those targets.

we share our experiences on what
has been effective within our operations
and are committed to engaging in the
public policy process

Additional examples of our engagements include:
• Low Carbon Working Group (LCWG): Chevron participates in
the LCWG, which hosted the Roundtable on Methane Emission
Quantification and Reduction in the Oil and Gas Industry in Kazakhstan.
The roundtable included members of government, industry and experts,
who discussed reduction opportunities.
• National Petroleum Council (NPC): Chevron is leading a task group
on baseline and expected emissions pathways for a study by the NPC,
which is a federal advisory committee for the U.S. Department of
Energy, on methane and other GHG emissions reduction opportunities
for the U.S. natural gas supply chain.
• Global Methane Pledge: Chevron supports efforts like the Global
Methane Pledge to reduce global human-made methane emissions by
at least 30% from 2020 levels by 2030. We participated in the Methane
Guiding Principles initiative to develop a policy toolkit for use by the
150 countries that have committed to the effort.
• United States Agency for International Development (USAID): At the
USAID Southeast Asia Smart Power Program workshop on oil and gas
methane emissions, we gave a presentation on the current deployment
of methane detection technologies and participated in a capacitybuilding session on regional needs for methane reduction.
• U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA): As part of the Global
Methane Pledge launched at COP26, the U.S. government, through
the USTDA, invited government officials from Algeria, Egypt and
Libya to visit the U.S. to showcase U.S. methane detection technology
and reduction practices. Chevron hosted a field tour in Midland and a
discussion in Houston with the delegates during their visit.
To view our public statements and comment letters, go to
chevron.com/newsroom/media/publications.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
64

section 6

metrics
calculation methodology ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 67
performance data .......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 71
climate-related disclosure .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 77
citations ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 78
glossary .......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 80

Photo: A worker conducting checks aboard the Agbami floating production,
storage and offloading vessel.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
65

section 6: metrics
increasing transparency by
annually reporting metrics and
performance data*
The following data tables compile our greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and other metrics for environmental performance in
alignment with several reporting standards. Due to the overlapping
reporting of GHG emissions across scopes between different
entities within the same value chain, Chevron’s reporting on
metrics, targets, aspirations and projections does not preclude
other entities in the value chain from calculating or reporting
emissions performance associated with Chevron-sold products
or services.
We consider reporting guidelines, indicators and terminology
in the frameworks of the Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board (SASB), Task Force for Climate-related Financial Disclosures
(TCFD), the Sustainability Reporting Guidance for the Oil & Gas
Industry (2020) by Ipieca, the International Association of Oil and
Gas Producers (IOGP) and the American Petroleum Institute (API),
as well as other reporting frameworks, to determine which data
to include in our tables.

To promote comparability, we map our reporting data to the
relevant SASB and Ipieca frameworks to help provide information
for investors and other stakeholders. Please note that the
references in the index columns are based solely on Chevron’s
interpretation and judgment and do not indicate the application
of definitions, metrics, measurements, standards or approaches
set forth by third-party groups, including the SASB and
Ipieca frameworks.
Chevron is also working with peers, stakeholders and voluntary
framework developers to foster increasingly consistent and
comparable information for investors and other stakeholders.
We were among the first oil and gas companies to publish a
report aligned with the TCFD framework in 2018, and this report
constitutes our sixth climate change resilience report. We will
strive to advance our performance and transparently communicate
progress. As an example of this, see the table below, which tracks
annual progress toward our 2028 GHG emissions intensity targets.

GHG reporting equity metrics and targets
2018
Portfolio carbon intensity (grams CO₂e/megajoule)

1

2019

2020

2021

2022

2028 target

73.4

72.7

71.4

71.3

71.0

71.0

Oil intensity (kilograms CO₂e/boe)

37.0

33.3

28.2

28.6

25.2

24.0

Gas intensity (kilograms CO₂e/boe)

34.7

30.4

26.8

28.6

27.5

24.0

Methane intensity (kilograms CO₂e/boe)

2.8

2.4

2.0

2.1

1.9

2.0

Flaring intensity (kilograms CO₂e/boe)

6.3

4.7

3.8

4.3

3.5

3.0

34.9

35.9

38.6

37.9

37.0

36.0

Upstream carbon intensity

2

Refining carbon intensity (kilograms CO₂e/boe)

3

*U
 nless otherwise noted, this section reflects 2022 data collected as of April 11, 2023. All data are reported on an operated basis unless otherwise noted. Data from Renewable Energy Group, Inc. are included
in this section unless otherwise noted. Operated GHG emissions and environmental performance tables include data from Tengizchevroil LLP (TCO) and the Partitioned Zone between Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
(SAPZ). Traditionally in this report, Chevron has included TCO data as if TCO were operated by Chevron; however, Chevron does not own a controlling interest in, does not operate and does not have the
authority to force implementation of Chevron management systems within TCO. TCO is a separate legal entity operated under the direction of a partnership council that Chevron does not control. Inclusion of
SAPZ data within the operational data is a reflection of alignment to OE reporting and not reflective of the underlying legal structure or governance practices. All restatements are restated against the May 2022
release of the Corporate Sustainability Report (2021). Variations year-on-year or across multiple years of performance data may result from a variety of causes such as methodology updates, portfolio changes,
economic conditions, and business performance and initiatives. Performance data are not a guarantee of future performance nor intended to be a demonstration of linear progress against aspirations, targets or
objectives. See Forward-Looking Statements Warning on page 84 of this report. Numbers in the table may not sum due to rounding.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
66

calculation methodology

portfolio carbon intensity
grams CO₂e/megajoule

i [(GHG

intensity)i * (Energy)i ]

–

j (Net

GHG removals)j

(Energy)i
Where: (GHG intensity)i is the simplified value chain GHG intensity of marketed product i, (Net GHG removals)j
is the net GHG emissions stored, or offset, and (Energy)i is the energy of the marketed product i.

our portfolio carbon intensity methodology
Introduction: The portfolio carbon intensity (PCI) methodology is
designed to facilitate carbon intensity accounting of a company’s portfolio.
It uses a representative value chain that includes equity-based emissions
associated with bringing products to market, including the indirect
emissions from use of sold products (Scope 3). The PCI methodology
facilitates transparency in calculations and data with information taken
from financial statements and emissions disclosures. This approach
enables comparison of companies that may participate in different parts
of the value chain and the use of real data when possible.
Chevron’s PCI represents the products we sell, including our own
emissions, emissions from third parties and emissions from customer
use of our products. For Chevron, the volume of emissions produced by
users of our products is larger than our volume of emissions associated
with either upstream production or manufacturing.
Intent: The PCI methodology provides a framework for transparent and
consistent comparisons of the mix of energy products provided by a
company and their associated carbon performance, inclusive of elements
of direct emissions (Scope 1), indirect emissions from imported energy
(Scope 2), and indirect emissions associated with the value chain and use
of sold products (Scope 3). The methodology is broadly applicable to oil
and gas companies involved in exploration and production, manufacturing
or marketing activities.

Scope: The PCI is calculated on an annual basis as the weighted-average
GHG intensity of energy delivered across gas, natural gas liquid (NGL), oil,
biofuel, hydrogen and lower carbon power products. Carbon removals are
deducted from total lifecycle emissions estimates.
The following energy products (i) are included in the PCI methodology:
• Gas: piped gas, LNG, compressed natural gas and renewable natural gas
• Natural gas liquids: NGLs from upstream and refining
• Liquid fuels: crude oil and its refined products (gasoline, diesel, jet
fuel, fuel oil and other petroleum products), ethanol, renewable diesel,
biodiesel and sustainable aviation fuel
• Hydrogen: external sales of hydrogen, including lower carbon hydrogen
• L
 ower carbon power: external sales of wind, solar and
geothermal power
The following removals ( j) are included in the PCI methodology
calculation:
• CCUS removes CO₂ either directly from the atmosphere or from streams
that would be released to the atmosphere. It does not include CO₂
produced from naturally occurring reservoirs that is used for enhanced
oil recovery.
• High-integrity offsets include nature-based solutions

PCI definition: Estimated energy-weighted average GHG emissions inten­sity
from a simplified value chain from the production, manufacturing, distribution and end use of marketed energy products per unit of energy delivered.

For traditional hydrocarbon products (gas, NGL and oil), marketed
volumes are based on the business segment (production, manufacturing
or marketing) with the largest overall commodity volume, inclusive of all
traded volumes.

Units: Grams of carbon dioxide-equivalent GHG emissions per megajoule
of energy delivered (g CO₂e/MJ) on a higher-heating-value basis to align
with prior frameworks on gas value chain emissions and with heating
values commonly used in commercial contracts.†

Chemicals and other business lines that do not primarily supply energy
products are excluded from this calculation.

†S
 everal prior product-intensity frameworks have used lower heating value for
intensity calculations.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
67

Methodology and data sources
Traditional hydrocarbon products: The intent of the framework is to
capture value chain emissions associated with the largest hydrocarbon
product volume for a company among its production, manufacturing
and marketing activities. For all products that a company produces or
manufactures, the PCI methodology uses the company’s equity GHG
emissions and corresponding GHG intensity. To estimate the emissions for
marketed products that the company does not produce or manufacture,
the PCI methodology uses industry-average segment factors from
the International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook. Hydrocarbon
transporta­tion emissions are estimated in the PCI using IEA World Energy
Outlook estimates for transportation emissions from oil and gas. Emissions
associated with end use of marketed products are based on industrystandard combustion factors and assume all sold energy products are
combusted, although this is not the case (e.g., plastics and lubricants).
Exhibit 44 is a depic­tion of the value chain approach for the refinedproduct value chain.
Biofuels, hydrogen and lower carbon power: GHG emissions are
calculated based on lifecycle assessment data and the energy provided
by Chevron in the most recent year. Lifecycle assessment data sources
include California Air Resources Board (CARB) Low Carbon Fuel Standard
(LCFS) Pathway Certified Carbon Intensities for similar feedstocks and
pathways, a Hydrogen Council report on a lifecycle assessment for
hydrogen pathways, and harmonized lifecycle assessments of electricity
generation from the (U.S.) National Renewable Energy Laboratory and
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group 1.

Inputs are collected from financial disclosures and public GHG reporting,
with the exception of the biofuels component. Biofuel volumes are
based on purchase data and production volumes for ethanol, renewable
diesel, sustainable aviation fuel, and biodiesel and production volumes
for renewable natural gas in the United States, Hong Kong, Malaysia,
Philippines, Thailand and Australia. Volumes from international GS
Caltex operations in South Korea are assumed to be zero. For 2016–2022,
aggregate biofuel volumes used in the PCI calculation are 60,000, 61,000,
62,000, 68,000, 61,000, 70,000 and 105,000 barrels of oil-equivalent
per day, by respective year. Biofuel carbon intensity values are based on
CARB LCFS default pathway values. For 2016–2022, the weighted-average
biofuel carbon intensity values used in the PCI calculation were 52, 52, 51,
50, 48, 47 and 38 grams carbon dioxide-equivalent GHG emissions per
megajoule, respectively.
CCUS: Net GHG removal emissions associated with CCUS represent
the emissions that would be permanently sequestered underground or
utilized in other products with a deduction for supply chain emissions
associated with capture, transport or storage. CCUS projects that reduce
direct emissions (Scope 1) and indirect emissions from imported energy
(Scope 2) would reduce the production, manufacturing or other sectoral
intensity and would not be double-counted as removals; for example,
CO₂ captured by an integrated CCS plant would already be accounted for
in the facility’s direct emissions (Scope 1) intensity.
Offsets: Offsets that are retired by the company or on behalf of customers
for use of product provided by the company.
Improvements over time: Methodologies and emissions factors may
be updated in future years to reflect additional information or data that
become available. For example, updates may include updated industry
averages, primary data from third-party producers and refiners, and
adjustments to energy efficiency assumptions, if warranted, based on the
end-use applications for volumes of energy marketed by the company.

The model does not adjust for the energy efficiency gains associated
with some applications of electricity and hydrogen relative to existing
hydrocarbon infrastructure. For example, CARB estimates that energy
provided as electricity to an electric vehicle is 3.4 times more efficient
than energy provided by gasoline to an internal combustion engine.
Model updates could be made in the future, if supported by the end use
of electricity or hydrogen products.

A PCI calculator is available on our website and can be used by
integrated energy providers and specialized value chain participants
to compare energy companies’ carbon intensities. To access the PCI
calculator, visit chevron.co/chart-generator.

Exhibit 44. PCI approach for the refined-product value chain

Activity
% of total

Production

Transportation

Refining

Transportation

End use

15%

< 1%

10%

< 1%

75%

Company
data

Industryaverage
data

Illustrative percentages are based on data from Chevron’s PCI calculator; Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI)’s Oil Climate Index plus Gas, “Profiling Supply Chain Emissions,” April 2023,
ociplus.rmi.org/supply-chain; and IEA, World Energy Outlook 2018, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2018.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
68

upstream carbon intensity
kilograms CO₂e/boe

Upstream carbon intensity (UCI) includes emissions intensity metrics for oil production, gas production,
flaring and methane. Chevron’s UCI metrics are equity-based, which means that they include our pro rata
share of emissions both from the assets that Chevron operates and from our nonoperated joint ventures.
The metrics reflect commodity basis to align with end use and enable value chain reporting.
upstream oil intensity

(

Direct emissions
(Scope 1)

+

Indirect emissions associated
with imported electricity
and steam (Scope 2)

Emissions associated

– with exported electricity
and steam

)

Allocated to liquids
on a production
basis (boe)

)

Allocated to gas
on a production
basis (boe)

Net production of liquids

upstream gas intensity

(

Direct emissions
(Scope 1)

+

Indirect emissions associated
with imported electricity
and steam (Scope 2)

Emissions associated

– with exported electricity
and steam

Net production of gas (including LNG and GTL)

upstream flaring intensity
Direct flaring emissions as CO₂e (Scope 1)
Net production of gas and liquids (including LNG and GTL)

upstream methane intensity
Direct methane emissions as CO₂e (Scope 1)
Net production of gas and liquids (including LNG and GTL)

Emissions reported are net (Scope 1 and 2). The emissions included in the metrics generally represent Chevron’s equity share of emissions from upstream, including LNG and GTL facilities, which are emissions
from operated and nonoperated joint venture assets based on Chevron’s financial interest. For reporting, Chevron includes certain indirect sources of GHG emissions within direct emissions that are outside of
the traditional Scope 1 definition, such as GHG emissions from processes like drilling and completions, and tolling agreements up to the point of third-party custody transfer of the oil or gas product. For oil and
gas production intensity metrics, production is aligned with net production values reported in the Chevron Corporation Supplement to the Annual Report, which represent the company’s equity share of total
production after deducting both royalties paid to landowners and a government’s agreed-upon share of production under a production sharing agreement. Chevron’s equity-share emissions include emissions
associated with these excluded royalty barrels in accordance with the Ipieca Guidance. Also in accordance with the Ipieca Guidance, Chevron’s equity-share emissions do not include emissions associated with
royalty payments received by the company. Allocation of emissions between oil and gas is based on the fraction of production represented by liquids or gas. Flaring and methane intensities use the total of liquids
and gas production. Oil and gas production intensities use liquids production and natural gas production, respectively.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
69

refining carbon intensity
kilograms CO₂e/boe

The refining carbon intensity (RCI) metric provides a measure of GHG released during the transformation
of raw materials into refined products. RCI is throughput-based and includes GHG emissions from
Chevron’s own refining operations and estimates of emissions associated with third-party processing of
imported feedstocks such as hydrogen.*† Throughput includes net crude and other feedstocks (including
bio-based feedstocks). Scope includes crude refineries, biorefineries and co-processing facilities.‡
The metric is on an equity basis.

(

Refinery direct
GHG emissions
(Scope 1)

+

Refinery indirect GHG emissions
associated with imported
electricity and steam (Scope 2)

+

Third-party processing emissions
associated with imported
feedstocks* (a type of Scope 3)

–

)

Emissions associated
with exported electricity
and steam

Crude + Other feedstocks, including bio-based feedstocks

* Emissions from third-party processing of imported feedstocks are estimated using infor­mation including supplier data, industry segment averages and engineering estimates. Emissions included in the
calculation represent refinery processing only and do not include terminals or chemical, additive, base oil and lubricant facilities not integrated into a refinery. Feedstocks include hydrogen and intermediate
products that will be further refined or used in conversion units. Feedstocks do not include natural gas used as fuel or products intended solely for blend­ing into finished products. Feedstocks are assessed
on a net basis (imports minus exports).
† Emissions associated with the production of hydrogen can account for 25% of total refinery emissions, and more than half of the hydrogen used in U.S. refining is imported from a third party. (“Available
and Emerging Technologies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from the Petroleum Refinery Industry,” US EPA Office of Air and Radiation 2010 and U.S. Energy Information Administration, EIA-820
Annual Refinery Report and EIA-810 Refinery and Blender Net Input).
‡

Chevron’s 2022 RCI metric excludes biorefineries acquired from Renewable Energy Group, Inc. in June 2022. The 2023 RCI metric is expected to include these biorefineries.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
70

equity emissions
2018
direct GHG emissions (scope 1)

2019

2020

2021

2022

66

62

54

57

53

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 8

28

27

23

23

18

CO₂ (million tonnes)

25

24

21

20

16

0.10

0.10

0.08

0.08

0.07

2.5

2.4

2.1

2.1

1.8

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Upstream flaring (subset of Scope 1) – all GHGs
(million tonnes CO₂e)

5

5

4

4

3

CO₂ (million tonnes)

5

4

3

4

3

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 9

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e) 9

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

70,000

60,000

50,000

50,000

40,000

Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

2

1

1

1

1

CO₂ (million tonnes)

2

1

1

1

1

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

20

19

18

20

20

CO₂ (million tonnes)

20

19

18

19

19

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) – all GHGs
(million tonnes CO₂e)

9

8

7

8

9

CO₂ (million tonnes)

9

8

7

8

8

0.5

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.3

5

5

4

4

4

5

5

4

4

4

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

2

1

1

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 9
9

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Volume of flares (mmscf) 10

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 9
CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e)

ipieca

4, 5, 6, 7

direct GHG emissions (scope 1) – all GHGs
(million tonnes CO₂e)

CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e)

SASB

9

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

11

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
CO₂ (million tonnes)
CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

14

CO₂ (million tonnes)
CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

12, 13

CCE4: C1/A1
EM-EP-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-EP-110a.2

CCE7: C4

CCE7: A1
EM-MD-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-RM-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-EP-110a.2

CCE4: C3

CCE4: C3

CCE4: C3

equity emissions table continues on page 72

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
71

equity emissions, cont.
2018
emissions associated with exported electricity and
steam – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 15

2019

2020

2021

2022

1

1

1

1

<1

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 8

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0

0

0

0

0

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

<1

1

<1

indirect GHG emissions from imported energy
(scope 2) – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

3

2

4

4

4

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 8

1

1

1

1

1

Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 11

1

1

1

1

1

LNG – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0

0

0

0

0

<1

<1

1

1

1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 11
LNG – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

12, 13

Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 14

SASB

ipieca
CCE4: C3/A6

indirect GHG emissions from imported energy
4, 6, 7, 16
(scope 2)

Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 12, 13
Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
indirect GHG emissions (scope 3)

14

17

CCE4: A2

Category 11 use of sold products – production method –
all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

396

412

412

408

391

Category 11 use of sold products – throughput method –
all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

380

382

372

389

391

Category 11 use of sold products – sales
method – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

628

639

583

611

668

third-party verification

18

Assurance level
Assurance provider

CCE4: C2/C3

Limited

Limited

Limited

ERM CVS ERM CVS ERM CVS

Limited

Reasonable

DNV

DNV

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
72

operated emissions
2018
direct GHG emissions (scope 1)

2019

2020

2021

2022

68

63

56

57

53

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

35

34

30

29

24

CO₂ (million tonnes)

32

31

28

26

22

0.14

0.12

0.11

0.12

0.09

3.5

3.0

2.7

3.0

2.3

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Upstream flaring (subset of Scope 1) – all GHGs
(million tonnes CO₂e)

9

8

6

7

4

CO₂ (million tonnes)

8

7

5

6

4

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 9

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.01

CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e) 9

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.5

0.3

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

130,000

100,000

90,000

100,000

60,000

Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

2

1

1

1

1

CO₂ (million tonnes)

2

1

1

1

1

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

15

14

14

15

14

CO₂ (million tonnes)

15

14

14

14

14

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

LNG – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

13

11

9

11

12

CO₂ (million tonnes)

12

11

9

11

12

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0.8

0.4

0.3

0.5

0.5

Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 12

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

CO₂ (million tonnes)

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 14

2

1

1

1

1

CO₂ (million tonnes)

2

1

1

1

1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

< 0.1

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 9
9

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Volume of flares (mmscf) 10

CH₄ (million tonnes CH₄) 8
CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e)

ipieca

4, 5, 6

direct GHG emissions (scope 1) – all GHGs
(million tonnes CO₂e)

CH₄ (million tonnes CO₂e)

SASB

8

Other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

CH₄ and other GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

11

CCE4: C1/A1
EM-EP-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-EP-110a.2

CCE7: C4

CCE7: A1
EM-MD-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-RM-110a.1

CCE4: C3

EM-EP-110a.2

CCE4: C3

CCE4: C3

CCE4: C3

operated emissions table continues on page 74

Indicates restatement of data from 2021 reporting.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
73

operated emissions, cont.
2018
emissions associated with exported electricity
and steam – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 15

2019

2020

2021

2022

1

1

1

1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

0

0

0

0

0

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

<1

1

<1

indirect GHG emissions from imported energy
(scope 2) – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

2

1

1

2

1

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

1

1

1

1

1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 11

1

<1

<1

1

1

LNG – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

0

0

0

0

0

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

<1

Upstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Downstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 11
LNG – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

12

Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 14

SASB

ipieca
CCE4: C3/A6

indirect GHG emissions from imported energy
4, 6, 16
(scope 2)

Midstream – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

Chemicals – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 12
Other – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)
indirect GHG emissions (scope 3)

14

17

CCE4: C2/C3

CCE4: A2

Category 11 use of sold products –
production method – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

617

622

588

621

592

Category 11 use of sold products –
throughput method – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e)

406

411

392

450

442

<1

1

3

1

1

CCE3: A6

Renewable Energy Credits (RECs for indirect
emissions) – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 20

0

<1

<1

<1

<1

CCE3: A7

Offsets – all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 21

3

1

2

13

10

GHG mitigation
Carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) –
all GHGs (million tonnes CO₂e) 19

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
74

operated other environmental metrics
2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

SASB

energy efficiency

ipieca
CCE6

Total energy consumption, operated assets and
nonoperated joint venture refineries (trillion BTUs) 22

940

916

851

859

784

CCE6: C1

Total energy consumption, operated assets
and nonoperated joint venture refineries
(million gigajoules) 22

992

967

898

906

828

CCE6: C1

Total energy consumption, operated assets
(trillion BTUs) 22

778

758

701

703

626

CCE6: C1

Total energy consumption, operated assets
(million gigajoules) 22

821

800

739

741

661

CCE6: C1

Manufacturing Energy Index (Refining) 23

85

85

88

88

92

CCE6: A4

358

362

341

306

255

CCE6: A2

Pipeline Energy Intensity
(BTUs per barrel of oil-equivalent-mile) 25

10

8

10

10

10

CCE6: A2

Shipping Energy Intensity (BTUs per metric ton-mile)

75

70

69

60

58

CCE6: A2

74

67

71

65

67

CCE6: A3

Upstream Energy Intensity (thousand BTUs
per barrel of oil-equivalent) 24

Non-Manufacturing Energy Index
water management

26

27

water withdrawn

28

ENV1

Fresh water withdrawn (million cubic meters)

71

70

63

67

63

Fresh water consumed (million cubic meters)

70

69

62

66

62

Nonfresh water withdrawn (million cubic meters)

39

45

34

33

33

Fresh water withdrawn in regions with high or
extremely high baseline water stress (%) 29, 30

0

0

0

19

24

EM-EP-140a.1
EM-RM-140a.1

ENV1: C4

Fresh water consumed in regions with high or
extremely high baseline water stress (%) 29, 30

0

0

0

19

25

EM-EP-140a.1
EM-RM-140a.1

ENV1: C4

Indicates restatement of data from 2021 reporting.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
75

ENV1: C1
EM-EP-140a.1

ENV1: C2
ENV1: A4

notes to pages 66 through 75
1 See Calculation Methodology, Portfolio Carbon Intensity, pages 67–68.
2 See Calculation Methodology, Upstream Carbon Intensity, page 69.
3 See Calculation Methodology, Refining Carbon Intensity, page 70.
4 Unless otherwise noted, Scope 1 and Scope 2 data collected as of February 9,

2023. Data include estimates.

18 For assurance statements, visit chevron.co/GHGassurance-library. Figures

in assurance statements may vary from figures reported in each subsequent
Corporate Sustainability Report due to restatements and assurance scope.
2022 assurance excludes Renewable Energy Group, Inc. and Chevron Phillips
Chemical Company, LLC data.

19 Carbon capture, utilization and storage includes both CO₂ sold to third parties

5 Scope 1 includes direct emissions. For reporting, Chevron includes indirect sources

of GHG emissions within Scope 1 that are outside of the traditional Scope 1
definition, such as GHG emissions from processes like drilling and completions,
and tolling agreements up to the point of third-party custody transfer of the
oil or gas product. Direct GHG emissions related to production of energy in the
form of electricity or steam exported or sold to a third party are included in
the reported Scope 1 emissions to align with Ipieca’s Sustainability Reporting
Guidance for the Oil & Gas Industry (2020). Chevron’s Scope 1 includes emissions
of six Kyoto GHGs – carbon dioxide (CO₂), methane (CH₄), nitrous oxide (N₂O),
sulfur hexafluoride, perfluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons, as well as nitrogen
trifluoride (NF₃).
6 Calculation methods for Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions are based on the

American Petroleum Institute’s Compendium of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Methodologies for the Oil and Natural Gas Industry (2021) or, where relevant,
local regulatory reporting methodologies.
7 When a nonoperated joint venture (NOJV) provides consolidated emissions

data, Chevron seeks to allocate its equity share of those emissions to the
most representative scope and GHG based on best available knowledge of
the NOJV’s operations.
8 Consistent with our financial accounting, Venezuela NOJV emissions are not

included for 2022 emissions reporting.

and CO₂ (and other gas) injected for carbon storage.
20 RECs are credits generated from renewable electricity generation within the

United States that are retired by Chevron. Reported Scope 2 emissions are net
of contractual instruments such as RECs.
21 Offsets are credits generated from the avoidance or reduction of GHG emissions

or the removal of GHGs from the atmosphere that are retired by Chevron,
excluding RECs. Includes offsets retired in compliance programs. For programs
with multiyear compliance periods, offsets are reported in the calendar year they
are retired.
22 Total Energy Consumption includes energy generated from Chevron’s operations

and imported energy. Exported energy is not subtracted from the total.
23 Manufacturing Energy Index (MEI) (Refining) is an analysis of Chevron’s refining

energy performance based on the Solomon Energy Intensity Index methodology.
Chevron’s MEI includes the refining assets at Chevron’s operated and nonoperated
joint venture refineries. Energy consumption from Renewable Energy Group, Inc.
is not included in this metric.
24 2022 Upstream Energy Intensity reflects continued updates to Chevron’s

calculation methodology.
25 Pipeline Energy Intensity covers assets operated by Chevron Pipe Line Company.
26 Chevron’s Non-Manufacturing Energy Index includes operations from Chevron’s

9 We provide methane emissions data and intensity performance as a mass

of methane as well as a mass of CO₂e. To convert from methane to CO₂e, we
use the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment
Report (AR4) 100-year global warming potential (GWP), except for some
business units for which we utilize GWP values from IPCC’s Fifth Assessment
Report and IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report in accordance with local reporting
requirements. Although we strive to provide consistent data from our operated
and nonoperated assets, some nonoperated assets may provide their data only
on a CO₂e basis. Given the common industry practice of using the AR4 100-year
GWP, we have assumed that nonoperated assets that did not provide methane
mass data use a 100-year GWP of 25. We continue to work with our joint venture
partners to provide information on a standardized basis to increase transparency.
10 Where flaring emissions are calculated based on mass or reported in aggregate,

volumes are not included.
11 Downstream includes emissions from refineries, terminals, marketing and

distribution, including renewable fuels. Chemical and base oil facilities located
within refineries are included in refinery emissions.
12 Chemicals includes emissions from stand-alone chemical, additive and lubricant

facilities.
13 Chevron Phillips Chemical Company LLC (CPChem.com) data received

April 4, 2023.
14 Other emissions include GHG emissions from Corporate Aviation, Chevron

Environmental Management Company, energy management and power from
Chevron Pipeline and Power, and the North American Data Center.
15 Exported emissions are direct GHG emissions related to production of energy in

the form of electricity or steam that are exported or sold to a third party. Direct
GHG emissions related to production of energy in the form of electricity or steam
exported or sold to a third party are included in the reported Scope 1 emissions
for each segment.
16 Scope 2 includes indirect emissions from imported electricity and steam.

CO₂, CH₄ and N₂O are accounted for in Chevron’s Scope 2 emissions. Scope 2
emissions are accounted for using the market-based approach as described in the
World Resources Institute’s GHG Protocol Scope 2 Guidance (2015), including
calculating Scope 2 emissions net of contractual instruments such as renewable
energy credits (RECs).
17 Chevron calculates emissions from third-party use of sold products in alignment

with methods in Category 11 of Ipieca’s Estimating Petroleum Industry Value Chain
(Scope 3) Greenhouse Gas Emissions (2016). Emissions are based on aggregate
production, throughput and sales numbers that include renewable fuels.

chemicals and additives, products and services, and lubricants businesses. It
reflects the energy required to produce Chevron’s products compared with the
energy that would have been required to produce the same products in 1992 (the
index’s base year). Energy consumption from Renewable Energy Group, Inc. is not
included in this metric.
27 Renewable Energy Group, Inc. data are not included in water management or

wastewater metrics.
28 Fresh water withdrawn from the environment is defined per local legal definitions.

If no local definition exists, fresh water is defined as water extracted, directly
or indirectly, from surface water, groundwater or rainwater that has a total
dissolved solids concentration of less than or equal to 2,000 mg/L. Fresh
water withdrawn does not include effluent or recycled/reclaimed water from
municipal or other industrial wastewater treatment systems, as this water is
reported under nonfresh water withdrawn. Nonfresh water withdrawn could
include: seawater; brackish groundwater or surface water; reclaimed wastewater
from another municipal or industrial facility; desalinated water; or remediated
groundwater used for industrial purposes. Produced water is excluded from
fresh water withdrawn, fresh water consumed and nonfresh water withdrawn.
Water quantities may be determined using direct measurement techniques or
engineering estimation methods.
29 Chevron reports fresh water withdrawn and consumed in water-stressed

regions according to the World Resources Institute’s definition and
categorization of “baseline water stress.” WRI Aqueduct map version 3.0 was
used to identify water-stressed areas. Baseline water stress measures the
ratio of total water withdrawals to available renewable surface and groundwater
supplies. Water withdrawals include domestic, industrial, irrigation and
livestock consumptive and nonconsumptive uses. Available renewable water
supplies include the impact of upstream consumptive water users and
large dams on downstream water availability. Higher values indicate more
competition among users.
		
Chevron’s fresh water withdrawn and consumed in high and extremely high water

stress areas excludes Chevron’s Fuels and Lubricants businesses and Chevron
Environmental Management Company. Freshwater withdrawals for the Fuels and
Lubricants businesses and Chevron Environmental Management Company are
minimal (1% of the total) compared with the overall use in the corporation. For
purposes of this reporting, Chevron categorizes all of the water withdrawn and
consumed by Chevron’s Mid-Continent business unit as being in a high-stress or
extremely high-stress region.
30 Freshwater use in water-stressed areas increased in 2022 due to completion

activity increases.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
76

climate-related disclosure
Chevron recognizes climate change is a growing area of interest
for our stakeholders, including investors. The table below shows
how the disclosures in this report align with the recommendations
of the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures, as the TCFD has described the categories,

and where the relevant information can be found in this report.
Further information can be found in Chevron’s Methane Report
(2022), Climate Change Resilience reports and Corporate
Sustainability reports. For Chevron’s latest reports, see our
reports and publications center.

disclosure

report
section

Board oversight

1.1

Public Policy and Sustainability Committee

1.1.1

Other Board-level committees

1.1.2–1.1.4

Director qualifications and nominating process

1.1.4

(b) D
 escribe management’s role in assessing and
managing potential climate-related risks
and opportunities.

Executive management of climate risks

1.2

Organizational capability on energy transition

1.3

(a) Describe the potential climate-related risks and
opportunities the organization has identified
over the short, medium and long terms.

Chevron’s strategic and business planning
processes

3

(b) D
 escribe the impact of potential climate-related risks
and opportunities on the organization’s businesses,
strategy and financial planning.

Chevron’s strategic and business planning processes

3

Portfolio

4

(c) Describe the resilience of the organization’s strategy,
taking into consideration different climate-related
scenarios, including a 2° C or lower scenario.

Stress-testing our portfolio under
the IEA NZE Scenario

2.2.6

(a) Describe the organization’s processes for identifying
and assessing potential climate-related risks.

Physical risks

2.1

Transition risks

2.2

(b) Describe the organization’s processes for
managing potential climate-related risks.

Physical risks

2.1

Transition risks

2.2

(c) Describe how processes for identifying, assessing and
managing potential climate-related risks are integrated
into the organization’s overall risk management.

Risk management

2

(a) Disclose the metrics used by the organization to assess
potential climate-related risks and opportunities in
line with its strategy and risk management process.

Advancing energy progress

page 4

Assessing performance on a lifecycle basis

5.1

(b) Disclose Scope 1, Scope 2 and, if appropriate,
Scope 3 GHG emissions estimates and the potential
related risks.

Metrics

6

(c) Describe the targets used by the organization
to manage potential climate-related risks and
opportunities and performance against targets.

Advancing energy progress

page 4

TCFD recommendation*
governance
Disclose the organization’s
governance around potential
climate-related risks and
opportunities.

(a) Describe the board’s governance around potential
climate-related risks and opportunities.

strategy
Disclose the actual and
potential impacts of
climate-related risks and
opportunities on the
organization’s businesses,
strategy and financial
planning where such
information is material.
risk management
Disclose how the
organization identifies,
assesses and manages
potential climaterelated risks.

metrics and targets
Disclose the metrics and
targets used to assess
and manage potential
climate-related risks and
opportunities where such
information is material.

* See Section 7: About This Report.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
77

citations
section 1
1 Chevron Corp., 2022 annual report on form 10-K, chevron.com/investors/financial-information#secfilings.

section 2
2 Richters, O. et al., NGFS climate scenarios data set, phase 3 scenario explorer, 2022, data.ene.iiasa.ac.at/ngfs//#/workspace.
3 International Energy Agency (IEA), World energy outlook 2022, p. 21, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
4 Ibid., p. 338.

section 3
5 IEA, Defining energy access: 2020 methodology, October 2020, iea.org/articles/defining-energy-access-2020-methodology; The World Bank and the World Health

Organization, Measuring energy access: a guide to collecting data using the core questions on household energy use, October 2021, LSMS Guidebook Washington, D.C.:
World Bank Group.
6 U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), International energy outlook 2021 with projections to 2050 (narrative), October 2021, p. 12, eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/pdf/

IEO2021_Narrative.pdf; IEA, World energy outlook 2022, p. 239, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
7 EIA, Natural gas explained, eia.gov/energyexplained/natural-gas/use-of-natural-gas.php.
8 Ibid.
9 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, p. 59, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
10 UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Paris Agreement, 2015, p. 3, unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_paris_agreement.pdf.
11 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, p. 107, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
12 IPCC, Summary for policymakers in: Global warming of 1.5 °C, an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related

global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty, 2018, p. 17, ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2022/06/SPM_version_report_LR.pdf.
13 Ibid.
14 IEA, Energy technology perspectives 2020, iea.org/reports/energy-technology-perspectives-2020; IPCC, Special report: global warming of 1.5 °C, 2018, ipcc.ch/sr15/.
15 IPCC, Summary for policymakers in: Climate change 2022: mitigation of climate change, 2022, p. 28, ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_SPM.pdf.
16 Global CCS Institute, Carbon removal with CCS technologies, January 2021, p. 4, globalccsinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Carbon-Removal-with-CCS-

Technologies.pdf.
17 Global CCS Institute, Global status of CCS 2022, March 2023, status22.globalccsinstitute.com/2022-status-report/global-status-of-ccs/; Greenhouse Gas Protocol,

Land sector and removals guidance, ghgprotocol.org/land-sector-and-removals-guidance; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC),
Article 6.4 mechanism supervisory body on carbon markets achieves important progress, September 2022, unfccc.int/news/article-64-mechanism-supervisory-bodyon-carbon-markets-achieves-important-progress.
18 U.S. Office of Energy & Renewable Energy, Hydrogen shot, energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-shot; IEA, World energy outlook 2022, pp. 164, 369, 384, iea.org/

reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
19 IEA, Towards hydrogen definitions based on their emissions intensity, April 2023, iea.org/reports/towards-hydrogen-definitions-based-on-their-emissions-intensity,

License: CC BY 4.0.
20 BloombergNEF (BNEF), Lithium-ion battery pack prices rise for first time to an average of $151/kWh, December 2022, about.bnef.com/blog/

lithium-ion-battery-pack-prices-rise-for-first-time-to-an-average-of-151-kwh.
21 McKinsey & Company, The race to decarbonize electric-vehicle batteries, February 2023, mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/

the-race-to-decarbonize-electric-vehicle-batteries.
22 Argonne National Laboratory, GREET model fuel specifications, 2022, greet.anl.gov; Advanced automotive battery conference (AABC) for Li-ion battery performance,

2018, with Chevron internal compilations.
23 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A); BNEF scenarios (2022);

Wood Mackenzie scenarios (2022); S&P Global Commodity Insights scenarios (2022).
24 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, pp. 51, 149–150, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
25 IEA, Oil market report – December 2022, iea.org/reports/oil-market-report-december-2022.
26 IEA, Oil market report – March 2023, iea.org/reports/oil-market-report-march-2023.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
78

27 IEA, Change in upstream oil and natural gas investment, 2019-2022, iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/change-in-upstream-oil-and-natural-gas-investment-2019-2022,

License: CC BY 4.0.
28 Al-Fattah, S., Non-OPEC conventional production: decline analysis, implications and outlook (April 4, 2019), Available at SSRN: ssrn.com/abstract=3378011.
29 Energy Institute, Statistical review of world energy 2023, 72nd Edition, pp. 37–38, energyinst.org/_ _data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1055542/EI_Stat_Review_PDF_

single_3.pdf.
30 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, p. 372, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
31 National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation: update, 2021, p. 3, nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/80580.pdf.
32 International Energy Forum and S&P Global, Oil refining industry insights, stretched sector fuels market volatility, September 2022, pp. 3, 5, ief.org/_resources/files/

news/stretched-sector-fuels-market-volatility/ief-sp-global-downstream-investment-outlook---vf.pdf.
33 EIA, EIA forecasts U.S. refinery utilization to average more than 90% in 2023 and 2024, February 2023, eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=55499.
34 IEA, World energy outlook 2022, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A).
35 Ibid., p. 452.
36 International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (Ipieca), Ipieca sustainability reporting guidance for the oil and gas industry, 2020, rev. 2023,

p. 3.12, ipieca.org/work/sustainability/performance-reporting/sustainability-reporting-guidance.

section 4
37 For natural gas, avoided emissions are estimated only for the portion of natural gas used in power globally (37% in 2021) and it is assumed coal is the displaced

competing alternative power source (i.e., if power had not been generated by natural gas, it would have been generated from coal). The 37% number is based on
Chevron analysis of the IEA’s World energy balances.

section 5
38 Gibassier, D., El Omari, S. and Naccache, P. (2020), “Institutional work in the birth of a carbon accounting profession,” Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal,

Vol. 33 No. 6, pp. 1447–1476, emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/AAAJ-12-2014-1912.
39 International Emissions Trading Association (IETA), University of Maryland, and Carbon-Pricing Leadership Coalition (CPLC), The economic potential of Article 6 of the

Paris Agreement and implementation challenges, September 2019, ieta.b-cdn.net/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/IETAA6_CLPCReport_2019.pdf.
40 U.S. Office of Energy & Renewable Energy, Energy efficiency: buildings and industry, energy.gov/eere/energy-efficiency-buildings-and-industry; IEA, Multiple

benefits of energy efficiency, iea.org/reports/multiple-benefits-of-energy-efficiency/energy-prices; IEA, World energy outlook 2022, pp. 246, 290, 345–346,
393, iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022, License: CC BY 4.0 (report), CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A); U.S. Wind Energy Technology Office, Experts predict
50% lower wind costs than they did in 2015, energy.gov/eere/wind/articles/experts-predict-50-lower-wind-costs-they-did-2015-0; OECD, The World Bank and
UN Environment, Financing climate futures, rethinking infrastructure, policy highlights, 2018, p. 6, oecd.org/environment/cc/climate-futures/policy-highlights-financingclimate-futures.pdf.
41 World Bank Group, State and trends of carbon pricing 2023, May 2023, hdl.handle.net/10986/39796, License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
42 IETA, University of Maryland, and CPLC, The economic potential of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and implementation challenges, September 2019, ieta.b-cdn.net/

wp-content/uploads/2023/09/IETAA6_CLPCReport_2019.pdf.
43 UNFCC, About carbon pricing, unfccc.int/about-us/regional-collaboration-centres/the-ciaca/about-carbon-pricing.
44 Breakthrough Energy, The green premium, October 2022, breakthroughenergy.org.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
79

glossary

definition of selected energy terms

Carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) The process of capturing
carbon dioxide emissions and either using them as a feedstock (utilization)
or permanently storing them in geological formations deep underground
(storage).

Flaring The controlled burning of gas, including associated gas, in the
course of oil and gas operations. In many types of operations, including
those where gas is sold, reinjected or otherwise utilized, safety flaring can
be an important and necessary activity to ensure safe operations. The
combustion efficiency of a well-designed and operated flare is generally
assumed to be greater than 98%, meaning that less than 2% of the gas
passes through the flare stack unburnt. At the individual flare level, local
parameters, such as gas content and quality, flare design, flow rates, exit
velocities and steam use, contribute to overall combustion efficiency.
There are currently no straightforward methods to continuously measure
or monitor the actual combustion efficiency or destruction and removal
efficiency of a flare.

Carbon efficiency The extent to which a given level of output is produced
with fewer carbon emissions relative to average output.

Gas-to-liquids (GTL) A process that converts natural gas into high-quality
liquid transportation fuels and other products.

Carbon footprint (of product) Sum of greenhouse gas emissions
and greenhouse gas removals in a product system expressed as
CO₂-equivalents based on a lifecycle assessment using the simple impact
category of climate change. A carbon footprint can represent the complete
lifecycle of a product or a partial lifecycle based on selected lifecycle
stages (sometimes referred to as a “partial carbon footprint”).

Hydrogen, lower carbon intensity (LCI) hydrogen LCI hydrogen includes
specified hydrogen production pathways like steam methane reforming
with carbon capture and storage and electrolysis with lower carbon power.

Avoided emissions The reduction in GHG emissions associated with a
product or service relative to alternatives.
Barrels of oil-equivalent (boe) A unit of measure to quantify crude oil,
natural gas liquids and natural gas amounts using the same basis. Natural
gas volumes are converted to barrels on the basis of energy content.

Carbon intensity The amount of carbon dioxide or carbon dioxideequivalent (CO₂e) per unit of measure.
Combustion The combustion of gas in fuel-burning equipment is not 100%
efficient, and some methane emissions occur as a result of uncombusted
gas being released via the equipment exhaust stream. The uncombusted
proportion of gas varies between internal and external combustion sources
(engines, turbines, heaters and boilers); therefore, equipment-specific data
or emission factors are typically used for emissions quantification.
Decarbonization Generally refers to the process of stopping or reducing
release of greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere as the result of a process. For Chevron, decarbonization can refer to
reducing absolute emissions or reducing the carbon intensity of a process
or asset.
Detection threshold The minimum quantity or concentration of a gas
(e.g., methane) that is reliably detectable by detection equipment. This is
sometimes called minimum detection limit. Detection limits can vary based
on the type of technology selected as well as the conditions during the
measurement period.
Emission factor A numerical factor relating activity data (e.g., tonnes
of fuel consumed, tonnes of product produced or number of pneumatic
controllers) to emissions. Emission factors generally represent the amount
of emissions per activity unit, for example standard cubic feet of gas per
hour per pneumatic controller. Emission factors are typically developed
based on a population of direct measurements of emission sources
or activities.

Lifecycle analysis/assessment (LCA) A tool that can be used to evaluate
the potential environmental impacts of a product, material, process or
activity. An LCA is a comprehensive method for assessing a range of
environmental impacts across the full lifecycle of a product system, from
materials acquisition to manufacturing, use and final disposition.
Liquefied natural gas (LNG) Natural gas that is liquefied under extremely
cold temperatures to facilitate storage or transportation in specially
designed vessels.
Lower carbon A term describing environments, technologies, business
sectors, markets, energy sources and mixes of energy sources, including
traditional energy sources, among other things, characterized by or
enabling the reduction of carbon emissions or carbon intensities.
Lower carbon energy Energy sources and mixes of energy sources,
including traditional energy sources, that, in their production and use, emit
less carbon emissions or have lower carbon intensity than other forms.
Lower carbon intensity oil, products and natural gas Oil, natural gas and
hydrocarbon-based products that are produced and sold to customers
with a carbon intensity below that of traditional oil, natural gas and
hydrocarbon-based products.
Methane intensity The amount of methane per unit of measure. Methane
intensity can be determined for a facility (e.g., compressor station), an area
(e.g., production basin) or even an entire value chain (e.g., from natural gas
production to distribution).
Methane management A holistic approach to addressing methane emissions performance across multiple dimensions, including actions to reduce
methane emissions intensity through facility design and operational best
practices; deployment of advanced technology to detect, measure and
quantify site- and source-level emissions; and development and assurance
of methane emissions inventories for reporting and disclosures.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
80

Methane measurement The process of taking a reading of the methane
concentration or methane emissions rate within an air sample at a specific
point in time. Typical measurement units are parts per million, parts per
billion and kilograms per hour. Understanding global and local background
methane concentrations is necessary to contextualize the data. Emissions
measurements may be performed as one-time activities, at regular
intervals or on a continuous basis, but whatever the frequency, obtaining
representative measurements is important.
Methane quantification Methods for determining the size of a methane
emission source in customary units of emissions rate, such as mass per time
(e.g., kilograms per hour) or volume per time (e.g., standard cubic meters
per hour). Methane can be quantified through engineering estimations,
direct measurement of a methane source (e.g., by utilizing bagging procedures), and modeling that uses ambient measurements and meteorological
data to infer an emissions rate.
Natural climate solutions Actions that reduce or avoid emissions and/or
enhance the capture and storage of carbon in nature include conservation,
restoration, and improved land management interventions on natural and
agricultural lands.
Nature-based solutions Per the International Energy Agency (IEA), these
include the repurposing of land use by growing forests where there were
none before (afforestation) or reestablishing a forest where there was one
in the past (reforestation). Other nature-based solutions include restoration of coastal and marine habitats to ensure they continue to draw CO₂
from the air.
Net positive impact Per Ipieca, a target for project outcomes in which the
impacts on biodiversity (i.e., the variety of ecosystems and living things)
caused by the project are outweighed by the actions taken to avoid and
reduce such impacts, rehabilitate affected species and landscapes, and
offset any residual impacts.

definition of selected units and terms
American Petroleum Institute (API) Trade association representing all
segments of the oil and gas industry in the United States.
bbl Barrel or barrels.
bcm Billions of cubic meters.
bcm/y Billions of cubic meters per year.
International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP) Global forum
of oil and gas producers.
International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation
Association (Ipieca) Global not-for-profit oil and gas industry association
for environmental and social issues.
mbd Thousands of barrels per day.
mboe/d Thousands of barrels of oil-equivalent per day.
mmbd Millions of barrels per day.
mmboe/d Millions of barrels of oil-equivalent per day.
mmbtu Millions of British thermal units.
mmbtu/d Millions of British thermal units per day.
mmscf Millions of standard cubic feet.
mmtpa Millions of tonnes per annum.
mtpa Thousands of tonnes per annum.

Net zero upstream aspiration (Scope 1 and 2) Chevron aspires to reach
net zero upstream emissions (Scope 1 and 2) by 2050. Accomplishing
this aspiration depends on continuing progress on commercially viable
technology; government policy; successful negotiations for carbon capture
and storage and nature-based projects; availability of cost-effective,
verifiable offsets in the global market; and granting of necessary permits
by governing authorities.
Pneumatic controller An automated instrument used for maintaining
a process condition such as liquid level, pressure, delta-pressure
and temperature.
Portfolio carbon intensity (PCI) Representation of the estimated energyweighted average greenhouse gas emissions intensity from a simplified
value chain from the production, refinement, distribution and end use of
marketed energy products per unit of energy delivered.
Routine flaring The flaring of gas during normal oil production operations
in the absence of sufficient facilities or amenable geology to reinject the
produced gas, utilize it onsite or dispatch it to a market.
Super-emitter A methane source that emits a disproportionate amount
compared to emissions from the total source category. Super-emitters can
be continuous or episodic and can have a wide range of underlying causes,
such as a failing tank control, lack of takeaway or pipeline blowdown.
A study by NASA defines a super-emitter as a source that emits greater
than 10 kilograms of methane per hour.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
81

section 7

about this report

Photo: A worker on scaffolding at the facility in Kazakhstan. Chevron holds a
50% interest in Tengizchevroil (TCO), which operates the Tengiz Field in Kazakhstan,
the world’s deepest producing supergiant oil field. TCO has applied innovative
technologies to redirect gas for its own use, for delivery to consumers and for
reinjection into the reservoir.
Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
82

section 7: about this report
This report covers our owned and operated businesses and does
not address the performance or operations of our suppliers,
contractors and partners unless otherwise noted. In the case
of certain joint ventures for which Chevron is the operator,
we exercise influence but not control. Thus, the governance,
processes, management and strategy for those joint ventures are
known to differ from those detailed in this report. At the time of
writing, Chevron has completed acquisitions of Beyond6, LLC,
Chacraservicios S.r.l. (with Bunge) and PDC Energy, Inc. This
report does not speak to these companies’ historic governance,
risk management, strategy approaches or emissions performance
unless specifically referenced. All financial information is presented
in U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
This report contains forward-looking statements relating to
the manner in which Chevron intends to conduct certain of its
activities, based on management’s current plans and expectations.
These statements are not promises or guarantees of future
conduct or policy and are subject to numerous risks, uncertainties
and other factors, many of which are beyond our control and are
difficult to predict, including government regulation and oil and
gas prices. See the Forward-Looking Statements Warning on
page 84 of this report.
Therefore, the actual conduct of our activities, including the
development, implementation or continuation of any program,
policy or initiative discussed or forecasted in this report, may
differ materially in the future. As with any projections or estimates,
actual results or numbers may vary. The protocols, methodologies
and standards (“methodologies”) for tracking and reporting on
emissions, emissions reductions, offsets and related issues are
relatively new, have not been harmonized and continue to evolve.
Chevron methodologies continue to evolve and may change from
time to time, which may result in a lack of comparative data for
different periods. Our methodologies may not always align with
evolving voluntary standards for identifying, measuring, and
reporting metrics; our interpretation of reporting standards may
differ from those of others; and such standards may change over
time; any of which could result in significant revisions to our goals,
targets and aspirations or reported progress, or lack thereof, in
achieving them. The statements of intention in this report speak
only as of the date of this report. Chevron undertakes no obligation
to publicly update any statements in this report.
This report contains information from third parties, such as the IEA.
Chevron makes no representation or warranty as to the third-party
information. Where necessary, Chevron received permission to cite
third-party sources, but the information and data remain under the
control and direction of the third parties. Where Chevron has used
information, such as displaying data from third parties in graphical
form, it has noted the source.

Chevron has also provided links in this report to third-party
websites for ease of reference. Chevron’s use of the third-party
information in this report and the inclusion of links to third-party
content is not an endorsement or adoption of such information.
This report contains terms used by the TCFD, as well as
information about how the disclosures in this report align with the
recommendations of the TCFD, as it has described the categories.
In doing so, Chevron does not intend to endorse or adopt and is
not endorsing or adopting these phrases or recommendations.
In using these terms and referencing the recommendations,
Chevron is not obligating itself to use the terms in the way defined
by the TCFD, nor is it obligating itself to comply with any specific
recommendations or to provide any specific disclosure. Chevron
makes no representation or warranty as to the TCFD’s use or
definition of specific terms or recommendations. For example,
with respect to the use of the term material, individual companies
are best suited to determine what information is material, under
the long-standing U.S. Supreme Court definition of that term,
and whether to disclose this information in U.S. Securities and
Exchange financial filings.
Chevron participates, along with other companies, institutes,
universities and other organizations, in various initiatives,
campaigns, projects and other collaborations that express various
ambitions, aspirations and goals related to climate change,
emissions and energy transition. Chevron’s participation or
membership in such collaborations is not a promise or guarantee
that Chevron’s individual ambitions, future performance or policies
will align with the collective ambitions of the organizations or the
individual ambitions of other participants, all of which are subject
to a variety of uncertainties and other factors, many of which may
be beyond Chevron’s control, including government regulation,
availability of technologies, and market forces and other risks
and uncertainties detailed throughout this report. Such third
parties’ statements of collaborative or individual ambitions and
goals frequently diverge from Chevron’s own ambitions, goals
and commitments. Chevron will continue to make independent
decisions regarding the operation of its business, including its
climate-related ambitions, goals, commitments and investments.
Chevron’s goals, targets and aspirations reflect Chevron’s current
plans, and Chevron may unilaterally change them for various
reasons, including market conditions; changes in its portfolio; and
financial, operational, regulatory, reputational, legal and other
factors. Chevron’s individual ambitions and goals, and its progress
toward reaching those ambitions and goals, are stated in its own
corporate reports, including this report, Chevron’s Corporate
Sustainability Report and Chevron’s Methane Report, which contain
necessary context and disclaimers regarding Chevron’s aspirations
and goals and how Chevron measures its progress toward
reaching them.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
83

As used in this report, the term “Chevron” and such terms as
“the company,” “the corporation,” “our,” “its,” “we” and “us”
may refer to one or more of Chevron’s consolidated subsidiaries
or affiliates or to all of them taken as a whole. All of these terms
are used for convenience only and are not intended as a precise
description of any of the separate entities, each of which manages
its own affairs.

This report and additional information
on how we view and address potential climate
change-related issues can be found at
chevron.com/sustainability/
environment/energy-transition

Produced by Corporate Strategy and Sustainability,
Chevron Corporation
Design Sequel Studio, New York, sequelstudio.com
Photo credits Cover and first spread: Robert Seale; 6: Raanan Cohen;
12: Evan Martin; 22: Steve Babuljak and George Rosales;
37, 50: Steve Babuljak; 65, 82, inside back cover and back cover:
Marc Marriott/Rezolution Films

forward-looking statements warning
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS RELEVANT TO FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION FOR THE
PURPOSE OF “SAFE HARBOR” PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION
REFORM ACT OF 1995 AND OTHER IMPORTANT LEGAL DISCLAIMERS
This report contains forward-looking images and statements relating to Chevron’s energy
transition plans and operations that are based on management’s current expectations,
estimates, and projections about the petroleum, chemicals, and other energy-related
industries. Words or phrases such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “targets,”
“advances,” “commits,” “drives,” “aims,” “forecasts,” “projects,” “believes,” “approaches,”
“seeks,” “schedules,” “estimates,” “positions,” “pursues,” “progress,” “may,” “can,” “could,”
“should,” “will,” “budgets,” “outlook,” “trends,” “guidance,” “focus,” “on track,” “goals,”
“objectives,” “strategies,” “opportunities,” “poised,” “potential,” “ambitions,” “aspires” and
similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements.
These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to numerous
risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are beyond the company’s control and
are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from
what is expressed or forecasted in such forward-looking statements. Our ability to achieve
any aspiration, target or objective outlined in this report is subject to numerous risks, many of
which are outside of our control. Examples of such risks include: (1) the continuing progress
of commercially viable technologies and low- or non-carbon-based energy sources; (2) the
granting of necessary permits by governing authorities; (3) the availability of cost-effective,
verifiable carbon credits; (4) the availability of suppliers that can meet our sustainability and
other standards; (5) evolving regulatory requirements affecting ESG standards or disclosures;
(6) evolving standards for tracking and reporting on emissions and emissions reductions and
removals; (7) customers’ and consumers’ preferences and use of the company’s products
or substitute products; and (8) actions taken by the company’s competitors in response
to legislation and regulations. Further, standards of measurement and performance set
forth in this report made in reference to our environmental, social, governance, and other
sustainability plans and goals may be based on protocols, processes and assumptions that
continue to evolve and are subject to change in the future, including due to the impact of
future regulation. The reader should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking
statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. Unless legally required, Chevron
undertakes no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a
result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Among the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in
the forward-looking statements are: changing crude oil and natural gas prices and demand
for the company’s products, and production curtailments due to market conditions; crude oil
production quotas or other actions that might be imposed by the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries and other producing countries; technological advancements; changes to
government policies in the countries in which the company operates; public health crises, such
as pandemics (including coronavirus (COVID-19)) and epidemics, and any related government
policies and actions; disruptions in the company’s global supply chain, including supply chain
constraints and escalation of the cost of goods and services; changing economic, regulatory
and political environments in the various countries in which the company operates; general
domestic and international economic, market and political conditions, including the military
conflict between Russia and Ukraine and the global response to such conflict; changing
refining, marketing and chemicals margins; actions of competitors or regulators; timing of
exploration expenses; timing of crude oil liftings; the competitiveness of alternate-energy
sources or product substitutes; development of large carbon capture and offset markets; the
results of operations and financial condition of the company’s suppliers, vendors, partners and
equity affiliates; the inability or failure of the company’s joint venture partners to fund their
share of operations and development activities; the potential failure to achieve expected net
production from existing and future crude oil and natural gas development projects; potential
delays in the development, construction or start-up of planned projects; the potential
disruption or interruption of the company’s operations due to war, accidents, political events,
civil unrest, severe weather, cyber threats, terrorist acts, or other natural or human causes
beyond the company’s control; the potential liability for remedial actions or assessments
under existing or future environmental regulations and litigation; significant operational,
investment, or product changes undertaken or required by existing or future environmental
statutes and regulations, including international agreements and national or regional
legislation and regulatory measures to limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions; the potential
liability resulting from pending or future litigation; the ability to successfully integrate the
operations of Chevron and PDC Energy, Inc. and achieve the anticipated benefits from the
transaction, including the expected incremental annual free cash flow; the company’s future
acquisitions or dispositions of assets or shares or the delay or failure of such transactions
to close based on required closing conditions; the potential for gains and losses from asset
dispositions or impairments; government-mandated sales, divestitures, recapitalizations,
taxes and tax audits, tariffs, sanctions, changes in fiscal terms, or restrictions on scope of
company operations; foreign currency movements compared with the U.S. dollar; higher
inflation and related impacts; material reductions in corporate liquidity and access to debt
markets; the receipt of required Board authorizations to implement capital allocation
strategies, including future stock repurchase programs and dividend payments; the effects
of changed accounting rules under generally accepted accounting principles promulgated
by rule-setting bodies; the company’s ability to identify and mitigate the risks and hazards
inherent in operating in the global energy industry; and the factors set forth under the
heading “Risk Factors” on pages 20 through 26 of the company’s 2022 Annual Report on
Form 10-K and in subsequent filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Other unpredictable or unknown factors not discussed in this report could also have material
adverse effects on forward-looking statements.

Chevron Corporation 2023 Climate Change Resilience Report
84

the power of human ingenuity
to deliver progress
We all have a stake in a lower carbon future. Affordable energy is vital for economies to flourish.
Reliable energy is essential for national security. As we look to the future, technology solutions and
innovation are critical. We’ve been solving difficult energy challenges for decades, and we’re working
on the next generation of breakthrough technologies to deliver the energy solutions of tomorrow.

Photo: The blend services laboratory at Chevron’s Richmond
Technology Center, Richmond Refinery, California. Chevron’s
renewable base oil and renewable lubricant are available in the
market today.

There are many paths the future
could take, but a few things are
certain: The global demand for
energy continues to grow; more
affordable and reliable energy
is needed; current energy forms
are becoming cleaner; and new
energy solutions are emerging.

learn more
chevron.com/sustainability/
environment/energy-transition

Chevron Corporation
6001 Bollinger Canyon Road,
San Ramon, CA 94583-2324 USA
www.chevron.com
© 2024 Chevron Corporation.
All Rights Reserved.
913-0386 (03-24)

