Getting the planet on a path to net zero requires unprecedented
innovation and collaboration at immense scale. The ongoing societal
effort is critical but must avoid economic hardships and market
disruptions that result from energy and product shortages.
Solving this challenge is not an “either/or” proposition. It’s an
“and” equation. One that requires an increase in energy supply and
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions – improved energy security
and thoughtful progress in the energy transition.
Given the skills and capabilities required, there’s no question that the
energy industry plays a critical role – on both sides of this equation.
ExxonMobil is doing our part.
Since 2016, we’ve significantly reduced our Scope 1 and 2 operated
emissions.
And we've got plans to do more.
Our net-zero ambition is backed by a comprehensive approach centered
on detailed emission-reduction roadmaps. We completed these roadmaps
in 2022 and continue to update them to reflect technology and policy, and
to account for the many potential pathways, and the pace of the energy
transition. We are using this approach in our Permian Basin unconventional
operations, where we are on track to achieve our industry-leading plans to
reach net-zero Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030.
Beyond reducing emissions in our own operations, we see the opportunity
to use our core capabilities to help other essential industries and customers
lower their emissions. This is an immense opportunity with an addressable
market potentially measured in the trillions of dollars by 2050.⁴ That’s why
we established ExxonMobil’s Low Carbon Solutions business.
We’re working to profitably grow a leading position in these new
emission-reduction markets, with a focus on the global economy’s hard-
to-decarbonize sectors – like heavy industry, power generation, and
commercial transportation. These are critical sectors where cost-effective
solutions are lacking and where we can make a unique, significant, and
lasting contribution
To tackle it, the world needs industrial-scale solutions.
We need them deployed globally and at a much lower cost than today.
That will require continued advances in technology, and clear and consistent
government policies that catalyze investments in the near term. Additionally,
the world will need to establish a new industry – a carbon-reduction industry
– and a market that pays for the cost of emission reductions.
The skills and capabilities required to address these complicated challenges
play to ExxonMobil’s strengths and align with our strategic priorities:
• Leading performance
Industry leader in operating and financial performance.
• Essential partner
Value through win-win solutions for our customers, partners, and broader
stakeholders.
• Advantaged portfolio
Portfolio of assets and products outperform competition and grow value in
a lower-emission future.
• Innovative solutions
New products, technologies, and approaches to accelerate large-scale
deployment of solutions essential to modern life and lower emissions.
• Meaningful development
Diverse and engaged organization with unrivaled opportunities for
personal and professional growth doing impactful work to meet society’s
needs
Over our history and across the globe, we have built industries where none existed before.
We see this today with our developments in Papua New Guinea and Guyana.
At our core, we’re a technology company that uses our science and engineering capabilities
to bring value-added solutions to partners and customers. We do this in a variety of ways
using unique advantages in scaling technology and delivering complex, large-scale projects
safely, reliably, and at industry-advantaged cost. We're developing molecules that cost-
effectively meet the ever-evolving needs of society. We're unlocking critical oil and natural
gas resources trapped in geologic formations around the world. And we're capturing and
safely storing emissions for hard-to-decarbonize industrial processes.
Of course, our past successes and current strengths stem from the commitment,
experience, and capabilities of our people. Their skills, tenacity, and resiliency are the
bedrock on which our company is built.
If you were to make a list of the biggest challenges facing humankind right now, addressing
poverty and climate change would be at the top.
At the same time, if you were to make a list of the companies that have a credible chance of
improving access to affordable energy and other products that are critical to improved living
standards and reducing emissions, ExxonMobil would also be at the top.
The strategy we’ve developed, the organization we’ve built, and the businesses we’re
focused on position us to grow and create value for many decades to come, regardless of
the pace of the transition
This year’s edition of ExxonMobil’s Advancing
Climate Solutions Report describes our resolve
to drive meaningful change, the results we’re
already delivering, and the resiliency of our plans
under a wide range of future scenarios.
This Executive Summary highlights the significant
progress we continue to make toward:
• Achieving our 2030 emission-reduction plans
and our 2050 net-zero ambition.
• Reducing methane emissions.
• Building our Low Carbon Solutions business.
We encourage you to visit our website to explore
greater detail on these topics and others related
to our actions to address the risks of climate
change across our businesses
We achieved record production from our projects in the Permian Basin
and Guyana in the second quarter of 2023, up more than 20% from a
year earlier. 6
• We added 250,000 barrels per day of refining capacity in early 2023 in
Beaumont, Texas. The extra supply helps reduce rising price pressures,
easing the impact on consumers and businesses. It was the largest
refinery expansion in the U.S. since 2012.7
• We started up a chemical expansion project at Baytown, Texas, that has
capacity to deliver 750,000 tons per year of products that are used by
manufacturers to make stronger and lighter auto parts, construction
materials, packaging, and more. 8
• We’ve cut operated methane emissions in half since 2016, eliminated all
of our high-bleed pneumatic devices in U.S. operated unconventional
production, and established our Center for Operations and Methane
Emissions Tracking (COMET). When fully deployed, COMET is expected
to provide around-the-clock remote monitoring capabilities in the
region.
• We eliminated routine flaring in our Permian Basin operated assets, in
line with the World Bank’s Zero Routine Flaring Initiative,9 which is a key
part of our 2030 goal of achieving net-zero Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse
gas emissions from our unconventional operated assets in the Permian.
• We electrified our drilling fleet in the Permian Basin and deployed our
first electric fracturing units to further reduce emissions intensity.10
• We acquired Denbury Inc., which expands our Low Carbon Solutions
business opportunities by leveraging the largest CO₂ pipeline network
in the United States.11
• We signed landmark CO₂ offtake agreements with a major fertilizer
producer, a steel manufacturer, and an industrial gas company to
capture, transport, and store up to 5 million metric tons of CO₂ per year.
That’s equivalent to replacing approximately 2 million gasoline-powered
cars with electric vehicles,12 which is roughly equal to the total number
of EVs on U.S. roads today.13,14,15
• We began drilling for lithium in southwestern Arkansas – a process that
holds great promise to address the growing needs of the EV battery
markets.
Achieving net-zero Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions in our
Permian Basin unconventional operated assets.
• Deploying carbon capture and storage, hydrogen, and lower-emission
fuels in our operations.
• Further reducing methane emissions at operated assets in alignment with
the Global Methane Pledge and with Aiming for Zero Methane Emissions,
developed by the Oil and Gas Climate Initiative.
• Further reducing flaring in upstream operations to meet the World Bank
Zero Routine Flaring Initiative.
• Integrating lower greenhouse gas energy sources into our facilities through
long-term power purchase agreements and electrification.
• Improving energy efficiency in our businesses by evolving operational and
maintenance processes.
• Substituting low-carbon hydrogen for natural gas to reduce emissions
from furnaces.
• Deploying innovative solutions to further reduce greenhouse gas
emissions with future advancements in technology and supportive policies
We incorporate actions needed to advance our 2030 emission-
reduction objectives into our medium-term business plans, which
we update annually. The reference case for planning beyond
2030, including impairment assessments and future planned
development activities, is based on our Global Outlook.
The Outlook considers the existing global policy environment,
announced policy changes, technology advances, consumer
preferences, and the historical precedents for each of these
areas. It does not attempt to project the degree of future policy,
technology advancement, or deployment necessary for the world
or ExxonMobil to meet net zero by 2050.
As additional policies are implemented and technology advances
beyond our estimates, we incorporate those changes into the
Outlook and update our business plans accordingly as part of our
annual planning cycle
We have evolved our operating model, enabling efficiencies
that better leverage the scale of an increasingly integrated
company. At the same time, we have centralized many
of the skills and capabilities required by our business,
allowing us to improve allocation of critical resources;
drive continuous improvement, including detection and
measurement of emissions; and grow value. This serves us
well in a variety of future scenarios, irrespective of the pace
of the energy transition.
Our plans to reduce methane intensity across our operated assets remain on
track. These include reductions versus 2016 levels of 70%-80% in methane
intensity and 60%-70% in flaring intensity by 2030.
To get there, we’re developing and deploying enhanced technologies from
satellites to on-the-ground sensors for rapid detection and mitigation –
starting with a focus on our highest methane emission sources. At the same
time, we’re continuing to develop and advocate for strong measurement
and reporting frameworks to provide consistent, comparable, and
most importantly, useful data to inform our methane mitigation efforts
worldwide. In 2023, we took additional steps to further collaboration among
government and industry partners, including deciding to join the United
Nations Oil and Gas Methane Partnership 2.0.
Our Permian operations make up about 16% of our total methane
emissions. By rapidly advancing our plans in the basin, we’re reducing
emissions and developing solutions that we can refine and deploy in other
parts of the world. As of year-end 2022, we have eliminated routine flaring
in our Permian operations. With full deployment of our near-continuous
monitoring program in the Permian by 2025, we expect our Center for
Operations and Methane Emissions Tracking (COMET) to provide real-time
monitoring of 700 sites across 1.8 million acres.
Our progress in the Permian Basin guides our projects elsewhere. The
pneumatic devices in our industry are, as a category, the largest source
of routine methane emissions in our processes. That’s why in 2020, we
completed the elimination of high-bleed pneumatic devices across our U.S.
unconventional production, and we’re working to eliminate the rest by 2025.
Through actions like these, we’re eliminating potential sources of methane
emissions while advancing our ability to detect and quantify others.
We know we can’t go it alone. Collaboration will be vital as we implement
solutions to support society’s net-zero future. By working with a wide range
of universities, academic consortiums, environmental groups, and more,
we’re advancing leading-edge research and piloting new technologies to
help the industry and our company measure, reduce, and report methane
emissions
We determine which research projects to advance based on factors
including advantage versus alternatives, ability to scale, alignment with core
capabilities and key partners, and probability of commercial success.
We employ thousands of scientists and engineers, including more than
1,500 Ph.D.s. Their work drives our research in new materials, novel low-
energy processes, and improved means of CO₂ storage.
Our scientists have written more than 1,000 peer-reviewed publications
and received more than 10,000 patents over the past decade. In addition,
we collaborate with more than 80 universities around the world, four
energy centers, and several U.S. national laboratories. These collaborations
have increased knowledge in key areas important to the energy transition,
including fugitive methane emissions detection and modeling; optimization
techniques to understand CO₂ storage; electrification of processes; lower-
emission fuels; and energy systems models
We're pursuing more than $20 billion in lower-emission investments from
2022 through 2027, in addition to the approximately $5 billion Denbury
acquisition. About 50% of our lower-emission investments are targeted at
reducing emissions from operated assets, with the balance going toward
reducing the emissions of other companies.
We’re focused on customers in the heavy industry, power generation, and
commercial transportation sectors. These sectors provide great economic
value and generate significant emissions that aren’t easy to cut. Together,
these sectors account for about 80% of energy-related CO₂ emissions today.
Carbon capture and storage, hydrogen, biofuels, and lithium align with our
capabilities and have the potential to make a big difference in these hard-to-
decarbonize sectors
The technology exists today to capture and store CO₂ from emission
sources. Global agencies including the International Energy Agency, the
U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and the U.S. Department
of Energy have concluded that permanent storage of CO₂ in appropriately
selected geological formations is a safe and secure option.21
ExxonMobil has cumulatively captured more human-made CO₂ than
any other company on the planet, and we’re expanding our long-term
storage capacity in anticipation of market developments. We have three
of the largest third-party contracts to capture, transport, and store CO₂
– advancing projects that will help decarbonize a fertilizer company, an
industrial gases company, and a steel company.
The recent acquisition of Denbury expands our capabilities in this area. It
provides ExxonMobil with the largest owned and operated network of CO₂
pipelines in the United States, including 900 miles of pipelines near the
largest industrial complexes on the Gulf Coast. Combining Denbury’s assets
and our experience accelerates and expands our ability to help customers
reduce their emissions.
Ultimately, we see an opportunity to create a carbon capture and storage
business with the capacity to reduce emissions across the Gulf Coast by
more than 100 million metric tons per year.22 This transaction will help us do
that at a lower cost and faster pace
Hydrogen
We also have a long history with hydrogen, a zero-carbon energy source that
can be used to reduce emissions in hard-to-decarbonize sectors including
steel manufacturing, refining, and heavy-duty trucking, among others.
In Baytown, Texas, we are developing the world’s largest low-carbon
hydrogen production facility. We are designing it to produce 1 billion cubic
feet of hydrogen per day, using a process called “auto-thermal reforming“
to separate the hydrogen and carbon atoms. We plan to use carbon
capture and storage to sequester the CO₂ emissions. More than 98% of the
associated CO₂ emissions produced by the facility – 7 million metric tons per
year – are expected to be captured and stored.
Biofuels
We can also make a real difference with biofuels. Demand for energy-dense,
lower-emission fuels is expected to grow rapidly, especially in the aviation,
marine, and heavy-duty trucking industries.
This growth creates opportunities to process biofuels and make drop-in
replacements for today’s fossil fuels. Our Product Solutions business is
working to supply approximately 40,000 barrels per day of lower-emission
fuel by 2025, with a further goal of 200,000 barrels per day by 2030.
Lithium
Lithium production is an exciting new business opportunity for us. We’re
working to apply our upstream and downstream expertise to recover and
separate lithium from deep brine reservoirs. Using available technologies,
we’re working to produce this critical mineral more efficiently and with fewer
environmental impacts than traditional hard rock mining – helping to grow a
U.S.-based supply for the global battery and electric vehicle markets
As we discuss in our Global Outlook, the energy transition is underway, but
it is not yet happening at the scale or on the timetable required to achieve
society’s net-zero ambitions. Three key drivers are needed, and all involve
broad collaboration among governments, companies, universities, and
others.
First, continued public policy support. Incentives like those in the U.S.
Inflation Reduction Act provide a necessary catalyst for companies to begin
scaling low-carbon solutions. Permitting reform is needed to accelerate the
deployment of these solutions, a step recognized in the European Union’s
Net-Zero Industry Act. Constructive policy should be stable and transparent
so that market participants have sufficient time to adapt to changes. It
should also recognize the need to match supply with demand to minimize
price spikes that destabilize economies and penalize end-users.
Second, advances in technology. Only three of the more than 50
technologies needed to reach net-zero emissions by 2050 are “on track,”
according to the International Energy Agency.24 An approach to technology
where governments support further R&D and avoid picking winners and
losers through legislation will lead to quicker solutions that are the most
cost-efficient.
No single transition pathway can be reasonably predicted, given the
wide range of uncertainties. Key unknowns include yet-to-be-developed
government policies, market conditions, and advances in technology that may
influence the cost, pace, and potential availability of certain pathways. A full
complement of technology options should be considered to provide the most
economically efficient pathways.
And third, the development of carbon markets. Governments cannot
afford to continue paying for emissions reductions indefinitely. Ultimately,
to achieve global emission-reduction goals, the world will need to move to
widespread adoption of markets that reflect the cost of driving emissions
down.
Canada’s Clean Fuels Regulations, which went into effect in 2023, offer
an example of how governments can establish market-based policies that
encourage investment and enable society to accelerate emissions reductions.
The regulations set progressive standards for fuels that reduce carbon
intensity over time, thereby increasing the incentives for lower-intensity fuels
and enabling investments like the Strathcona renewable diesel plant to be
operated by our affiliate Imperial Oil
Our Board of Directors oversees and provides guidance on our strategy and
planning, which includes opportunities and risks related to climate change
and the energy transition. Directors engage with experts from inside and
outside the company and apply their individual experience and perspective
in evaluating the company’s capital-allocation priorities, with a focus on
growing shareholder value and playing a leading role in a thoughtful energy
transition.
The Board, collectively and through its Environment, Safety and Public Policy
(ESPP) Committee, regularly engages with senior management on climate
matters and our environmental approach and performance. This includes
briefings with internal and external subject-matter experts, which can
cover elements of scientific and technical research, public policy positions,
greenhouse gas emission-reduction reporting and performance, and new
technology developments
We have continued to assess the resiliency of our business and investment
portfolio against a range of future scenarios that are aligned with the goals
of the Paris Agreement, including the IEA Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE)
scenario.
These resiliency assessments demonstrate that our business is well
positioned even in an aggressive decarbonization pathway, driven by the
growth potential for chemicals, lower-emission fuels, carbon capture and
storage, and hydrogen opportunities, which are critical to achieve society's
net-zero ambition.
Updates to the IEA NZE scenario since 2021 have not changed the outcome
of our assessment, which highlights resiliency through investment flexibility
across options that are both needed and consistent with our core capabilities,
including oil and natural gas with lower emission intensity, chemicals, carbon
capture and storage, lower-emission fuels, and hydrogen