Sinopec Corp. activity implements the green and clean development strategies, sets "net
zero" emission of carbon as its primary goal, continues to promote the clean utilisation of
fossil energy, scaling-up of clean energy, and low-carbon production process, so as to achieve
the high-quality realisation of the carbon peaking and carbon neutrality targets, contributing its
bit for the global response to address climate change. Referring to the recommendations from
the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), the Company systematically
discloses its governance structure, management strategies, risks and opportunities, and
actions and progress related to addressing climate change
Pays close attention to the risks and
opportunities posed by climate change,
the Company has taken the initiative
to integrate climate change into its
strategic planning, comprehensive risk
management system, and daily operation
and management; established a climate
governance structure consisting of the
Board of Directors, senior management,
Headquarters and subsidiaries; and clarifies
relevant roles and responsibilities to ensure
the integration of climate change into the
Company's governance system, effectively
manage climate risks and enhance the
effectiveness of its climate strategy
Responsible for reviewing development plans, policies, and systems related to climate
change, and providing the Board with suggestions on the strategic positioning and industrial
layout of the Company;
Responsible for reviewing and supervising the development plan and business performance in
natural gas, hydrogen energy, renewable energy, energy conservation and emissions reduction.
Responsible for identifying, assessing, and managing the risks and impacts related to climate
change and ecological environment protection, and reviewing the list of major risks and annual
evaluation reports.
Responsible for supervising the commitment and performance of the Company on key issues
such as climate change, and providing suggestions to the Board;
Responsible for reviewing the Company's annual sustainability report and supervising climate-
related information disclosure of the Company.
Responsible for identifying risks and opportunities related to climate change and relevant
countermeasures under the comprehensive risk management system, and reporting to the
Board, the Audit Committee, and the Sustainability Committee.
Responsible for implementing the Company's carbon peaking and carbon neutrality strategies,
formulating department/subsidiary level carbon peaking and carbon neutrality targets and
action plans;
Responsible for implementing the Energy Efficiency Improvement Plan and the Green
Enterprise Action Plan, and strictly managing greenhouse gas emissions and energy efficiency
targets;
Responsible for the implementation of carbon asset management, carbon mapping, and
carbon audits, establishing a dedicated carbon trading team to ensure the fulfilment of the
carbon quota of the Company
Effectively work on extreme weather monitoring and early
warning, formulate disaster emergency plans, and regularly
carry out disaster preparedness and emergency drills.
Carry out facility upgrade and improve disaster protection
level; and set up materials reserve for disaster prevention
and mitigation.
Encourage enterprises to identify climate vulnerability;
optimise energy conservation and environmental protection
facilities, improve energy efficiency and water efficiency,
and reduce the dependence on natural resources; carry out
climate change-related education for employees.
Promote the "Green and Clean" strategy, and the clean
utilisation of fossil energy, scaling-up of clean energy, and
low-carbon production process,
clean purification of fossil energy, large-scale clean
energy, and low-carbon production process; improve the
concentration of refining and chemical operations, reduce
backward production capacity, and build a green refining
and chemical industry.
Formulate energy consumption control objectives and
dynamically track energy intensity and total consumption
control indicators; further implement the Energy Efficiency
Improvement Plan to promote energy conservation
and efficiency; revise the approval process of energy
conservation of investment projects to eliminate energy
waste from the source; and carry out energy conservation
supervision and energy audit.
Effectively carry out methane emission reduction actions,
actively carry out pilot projects of methane recycling
and monitoring, and reduce methane emissions through
technologies such as methane leakage detection and repair,
exhaust air recycling, and closed process transformation.
Rely on the advantages of an excellent sales network,
accelerate the construction of hydrogenation station and
charging and replacement power station, and actively
transform and develop into a comprehensive energy
provider of "oil-gas-hydrogen-electricity service"
Carry out technological R&D planning and investment,
improve the efficiency of operation and technological
R&D; establish a key lab on Carbon Capture, Utilisation,
and Storage (CCUS) and actively research on essential
technologies such as low-carbon, zero-carbon, and negative
carbon technologies; and build a full-scale CCUS industrial
chain demonstration project.
Actively pursue green and low-carbon development
initiatives, pay close attention to and respond to stakeholder
concerns.
Formulate Sinopec's carbon peaking and carbon neutrality
action plans and roadmap, and actively participate in the
global climate actions.
Participate in establishing the China Oil and Gas Methane
Alliance; and
Sign and issue the Declaration on Carbon Peaking and
Carbon Neutrality of the Chinese Petroleum and Chemical
Industry
Develop new energy business with hydrogen energy
as the core, and accelerate the development of China's
largest hydrogen energy company with a hydrogen
energy industrial chain.
Actively develop low-carbon energy sources such as
natural gas, and increase the proportion of natural gas
in the Company's energy production.
Expand new infrastructure and services such as
charging and replacement power stations and
hydrogen refuelling stations, and help the development
of green transportation and hydrogen energy
transportation.
Promote large-scale development of bio-diesel and
bio-jet fuel, actively develop photovoltaic and wind
power businesses, promote the in-depth integration
between wind and solar "green electricity" and
traditional businesses, and increase the utilisation of
"green electricity".
By 2025, the supply capacity of new energy will
strive to reach the equivalent of 10 million tonnes of
standard coal
Accelerate industrial structure adjustments, retire
production capacity with high energy consumption and
low-energy efficiency, and promote industrial upgrading
and efficiency improvement.
Develop molecular oil refining, green hydrogen
refining, and other technologies, and increase the
utilisation of low-carbon raw materials.
Increase the use of natural gas and electricity
to replace coal, to promote a low-carbon energy
structure.
Increase the recycling of waste oil and grease, waste
plastics, and waste rubber products, to encourage the
recycle and reuse of resources.
Adhere to the principle of prioritising conservation,
continue to implement the Energy Efficiency
Improvement Plan, and comprehensively implement
the Energy Efficiency Leadership initiative to achieve
global leadership in the energy efficiency of key
products
Increase capital investment, develop complete sets
of low-carbon processes and technologies, and
promote the green and low-carbon transition of the
petrochemical industry.
Promote technological R&D and industrial applications
for using carbon dioxide as raw material to produce
methanol, lithium battery electrolyte, degradable
plastics, and other chemical products and high-end
materials.
Continue to research and promote CCUS technologies,
and leveraged the integrated operation of the Company
to build a million-tonne whole industrial chain CCUS
demonstration project
Carry out methane emission reduction actions,
promote the detection and repair of methane leakage,
increase the recovery and utilisation of venting gas and
the transform toward closed process, so as to reduce
methane emission intensity by 50% by 2025.
Establish an internal carbon price mechanism,
integrate the green and clean strategy into the whole
process of the Company's development and operation,
and reduce the carbon footprint of the entire product
life cycle.
Carry out exchanges and cooperation with international
industry peers on green and low-carbon technologies,
standards, and services to contribute the Chinese
perspective to global climate governance
Sinopec Corp. attaches great importance to greenhouse gas emission management and
strives to build a scientific carbon asset management system. It has established a series
of management policies, such as the Sinopec Carbon Emission Management Measures,
the Sinopec Carbon Emission Trading Management Measures, and the Sinopec Carbon
Emission Evaluation Management Measures for Fixed Asset Investment Projects. Based
on comprehensive mapping and evaluation of its existing carbon emissions data, Sinopec
scientifically coordinates its efforts in energy conservation and carbon reduction, methane
emission control, CCUS, and carbon trading, to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions
The Company places a high emphasis on carbon mapping and audit and closely monitors
annual carbon emissions using data obtained, and incorporates carbon emission reduction
measures into its overall production and operation plan. In 2021, the company continued to
carry out carbon mapping and carbon audits across all production units.
Formulated the Sinopec Carbon Emission Management Measures to specify carbon emission
statistics, emission reduction, trading and other procedures, and carried out annual audits and
internal mappings of the carbon emission data of subsidiaries to fully understand the carbon
emissions landscape within the Company.
Management Measures
Established and launched a carbon asset management information system, and optimised its accounting
modules during the year to improve the efficiency of data collection.
Management System
Covering all production units of the Company and its subsidiaries.
Including both direct greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 1) and indirect greenhouse gas emissions
from energy (Scope 2). Established product carbon footprint auditing and evaluation methodologies for
petrochemical products such as jet fuel, lubricating oil base oil, polypropylene, and xylene products.
Scope of Mapping
Referred to a number of domestic and international greenhouse gas emission accounting standards,
including ISO14064-1: 2006 Standards, China Oil and Gas Production Enterprises Greenhouse
Gas Emission Accounting Methods and Reporting Guidelines, and China Petrochemical Enterprise
Greenhouse Gas Emission Accounting Methods and Reporting Guidelines.
References
Sinopec's Energy Conservation Monitoring Centre conducts internal auditing and verification of
relevant data.
Sinopec Corp. continues to conduct carbon footprint accounting and evaluation of
petrochemical products. It has developed product carbon footprint accounting and evaluation
methods and accounting models for jet fuel, lubricating oil base oil, polypropylene, and
xylene. It has conducted a full-scale assessment of greenhouse gas emissions over the
product's complete life cycle, and used from the carbon footprint data to explore optimisation
possibilities, so as to support the energy conservation and carbon reduction of the Company.
In 2021, Sinopec Corp. drafted the Product Carbon Footprint and Product Category Standards
- Petrochemical Products, which has been integrated into the 2021 Carbon Peaking and
Carbon Neutrality Industry Standards Formulation and Revision Plan of the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology
In 2021, Sinopec Corp. worked together with value chain
partners to jointly developed China's first tanker of full life
cycle carbon-neutral petroleum. The project involved 30,000
tonnes of crude from Angola that imported and refined by the
Company. In order to offset the carbon emission in the whole
life cycle of this batch of petroleum, the project carried out third-
party verifications to accurately calculate the amount of carbon
dioxide generated in the entire life cycle from oil extraction,
transportation, storage, refining to product consumption. By
implementing energy conservation and emission reduction
strategies and purchased Chinese Certified Emission Reduction
(CCER), to offset the full life cycle carbon emissions. Among
them, Sinopec Corp. undertook the responsibility to offset the
carbon emissions from crude oil extraction, storage, refining,
shipping of petroleum products, and the use of fuels such as
vehicle gasoline, diesel, and liquefied petroleum gas.
Sinopec Corp. has formulated the energy conservation and emission reduction target for the 14th
Five-Year Plan, aiming at reducing the consumption of comprehensive energy per RMB 10,000 of
production value by 5% by 2025 (with 2020 as the base year).
Energy
efficiency
target
Optimise Energy Structure The Company actively promotes the structural transition towards clean and low-carbon
energy, develops new energy projects, and gradually replaces coal with renewable energy
such as wind energy and solar energy. Regarding existing coal powered generation units, the
Company continuously implements efficiency upgrades to improve energy efficiency.
Promoted the low-carbon transition and
upgrading of coal-fired power plants by
promoting the operation mode of "obtain
electricity with heat", replacing coal
with natural gas, shutting down small
generator units, purchasing thermal
power and other measures. Achieve the
"coal removal" target at the power plants
of two refining and chemical subsidiaries.
Reduced Coal Use
Added indicators on new energy project
construction and evaluation to the green
enterprise approval and review process
with increased weight, to encourage
subsidiaries to utilise new energy and
reduce the reliance on coal powered
power generation and heating.
New Energy Utilisation
Increased the amount of "green
electricity" purchase at three subsidiaries
with suitable conditions, to encourage
the use of green electricity and reduce
the reliance on coal-powered electricity.
Increase Green Electricity Use
Optimise Energy Management Policy SystemEnergy Conservation With the goal of "strictly controlling total energy consumption and improving energy efficiency",
Sinopec Corp. actively promotes the Energy Efficiency Improvement Plan, implements
various energy-saving and carbon reduction measures, and encourages its subsidiaries to
improve energy efficiency and reduce energy consumption. In 2021, the consumption of
comprehensive energy per RMB 10,000 of production value of the Company reached 1.015
tonnes of standard coal 1 , decreased by 1.3% year-on-year. During the year, the Company
launched 544 energy-saving projects, saving 967 thousand tonnes of standard coal of energy,
equivalent to a reduction of 2.38 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions.
Focus
areas
Strictly control energy consumption increment
Reduce existing energy consumption
Implement key energy conservation projects
Accelerate the development of new
energy business
Consolidate energy conservation
management
Social
recognition
In October 2021, China Petroleum and Chemical Industry Federation released the list of Key Energy
Consuming Products Energy Efficiency "Front-runner" Enterprises of the petroleum and chemical
industry in 2020, including:
Qingdao Petrochemical and Guangzhou Petrochemical won the title of Energy Efficiency "Front-
runner" Refining Enterprises;
Zhenhai Refining & Chemical Co., Ltd. and Maoming Petrochemical Co., Ltd. won the title of Energy
Efficiency "Front-runner" Ethylene Production Enterprise;
Hainan Refining and Chemical Co., Ltd. won the title of Energy Efficiency "Front-runner" Xylene
Production Enterprise
Shengli Oilfield developed the Oilfield Energy Control Centre energy management system focusing on full
life cycle green management, building a whole process digital energy-saving management system to achieve
the closed-loop management of automatic monitoring, early warning, energy efficiency evaluation, and the
optimisation, improvement, tracking and statistical assessment of energy efficiency in oilfield development and
production. In 2021, Shengli Oilfield optimised and upgraded the system, and developed new management
functions for more energy sources, such as natural gas, new energy and refined oil products, realising full
coverage of energy sources and energy users. With the support of the system, Shengli Oilfield had significantly
reduced its energy intensity indicators with a variety of energy-saving and emission reduction measures, saving a
total of 76.3207 million kWh of electricity in the whole year. In 2021, Shengli Oilfield's Construction and Promotion
of Big Data Based Oilfield Energy Control Centre project was shortlisted in the Computing Innovation and Digital
Empowerment side exhibition of 2021 World Computing Conference.
Shengli Oilfield saves electricity in 2021
7,632.07 (10,000kwh)
The Company actively develops and promotes innovative energy-saving technologies, focuses
on key development of energy-saving methods, technologies and equipment, implement pilot
and demonstration projects, and continuously promotes and applies mature and practical
energy-saving methods, technologies and equipment, such as integrated regional energy
efficiency improvement of oil and gas fields, energy system optimisation, low-temperature
heat utilisation, comprehensive energy-saving treatment of industrial cooling water system,
and energy-saving upgrade of key energy-consuming equipment
Over the years, through fine management
of production and operation, Qingdao
Refining and Chemical Co., Ltd. has
continued to tap energy-saving potential
and actively carried out the Energy
Efficiency Improvement Plan. In 2021,
after completing the implementation of
energy-saving upgrade of equipment
and thermal insulation transformation
of pipe network, the Qingdao Refining
and Chemical Rooftop Photovoltaic
Power Generation Project was built with
an installed capacity of 867 kWh and
annual power generation capacity of
1.017 million kWh, using the technical
scheme of regional power generation
and nearby grid connection. The project
was completed and start operation within
the year. Rooftop photovoltaic modules at the Qingdao Refinery and Chemical Complex
In 2021, the Company's refining and chemical subsidiaries continued
to implement the recovering and utilisation of high concentration
carbon dioxide generated by hydrogen production and synthetic
ammonia production devices, capturing 1.5198 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide. The Company's oilfield subsidiaries used 307,600
tonnes of carbon dioxide for oil displacement and increased oil
extraction by 88,700 tonnes. In addition, in January 2022, the
Company successfully completed the construction of the million-
tonne CCUS project at Qilu Petrochemical's Shengli Oilfield, making
contribution to the development of a safe and reliable domestic
CCUS technology system and industrial cluster with low cost and low
energy consumption.
In the future, the Company will explore the possibility of establishing
CCUS technology R&D centre, develop a carbon dioxide utilisation
In July 2021, Sinopec Corp. launched China's first Million-
ton CCUS Project, the Qilu Petrochemical-Shengli Oilfield
Million-ton CCUS Project, which consists of two parts: Qilu
Petrochemical CO 2 Capture Project and Shengli Oilfield CO2
Displacement and Storage Project. The CO 2 captured by
Qilu Petrochemical is transported to Shengli Oilfield through
green transportation facilities to be used for oil displacement
and storage, which results in an integrated application of
carbon dioxide capture, oil displacement, and storage,
providing an typical demonstration case for promoting large-
scale CCUS project.
For carbon dioxide capture, Qilu Petrochemical built a million
ton per year liquid carbon dioxide recovery and utilisation
device to recover the carbon dioxide from the tail gas of the
coal-based hydrogen production unit, purifying the captured
carbon dioxide to 99% purity. For carbon utilisation and
The Qilu Petrochemical-Shengli Oilfield Million-ton CCUS Project of Qilu Petrochemical
Sinopec Corp. attaches great emphasis on CCUS, and has intensified R&D investment
and implemented key projects focusing on key CCUS technologies and their industry-scale
application, aiming at building a demonstration project of the whole CCUS industrial chain.
With an early start in CCUS technological research and engineering practice, the Company
has developed certain advanced carbon capture technologies, at the forefront in China, and
accumulated extensive engineering application experience.
Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage
(CCUS)
The Company started
researching on carbon
capture technologies in
the 1980s, and some of its
proprietary technologies, such
as low partial pressure carbon
dioxide capture, catalytic hot
potash de-carbonisation, and
steric amine de-carbonisation,
are industry leading in China,
and among the forerunners
globally. In China, there
were over 50 sets of devices
adopted the low partial
pressure carbon dioxide
capture technology, and over
40 sets of device adopted the
catalytic hot potash method
and the steric ammonia de-
carbonisation method.
Carbon Capture
The Company started
researching on large-scale
and long-distance pipeline
transportation technology for
carbon dioxide in 2009, and
had developed technologies
such as carbon dioxide
pipeline transportation
process design, and pipeline
leakage research and crack
prevention. The Company
also took the lead in the
compilation of carbon dioxide
pipeline transportation
industry standards, and has
developed the design and
construction capability of
carbon dioxide transportation
pipeline in a variety of
specifications.
Carbon Transport
The Company actively
conducted field testing of carbon
dioxide high-pressure miscible
flooding in oil fields in East
China, Shengli, Zhongyuan,
and Jiangsu to effectively solve
the problem for oil extraction
in ultra-low permeability
reservoirs. The "coordinated
entry-exit and flooding-
displacement" carbon dioxide
flooding model enabled the
effective development of closed
small fault-block reservoirs.
The Company had built China's
first industrial refinery tail gas-
oil displacement, recycling, and
storage base for high water cut
reservoirs in Zhongyuan Oilfield.
Oil Displacement and
Storage
The Company has established
the Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage
(CCUS) Key Laboratory
to carry out research on
key CCUS technologies,
including a carbon capture
technology laboratory, a CO2
oil displacement laboratory, a
geological storage laboratory,
a carbon capture engineering
laboratory, and a carbon
footprint laboratory.
Technological R&D
Qilu Petrochemical staff inspect the refrigeration unit of the CCUS project
technology innovation system in accordance with the "technology
development - engineering demonstration - industrialisation" model,
focus on the deployment of cutting-edge technology projects and the
development of technology reserve, such as CCUS+ new energy,
CCUS+ hydrogen energy, and CCUS+ biomass energy; and explore
the use of carbon dioxide to generate high-value chemicals and
carbon dioxide mineralisation, extend the clean carbon storage
industrial chain and promote the development of million-tonne
CCUS demonstration bases in other regions. Sinopec Corp. strives
to development a technology system based on the research of
demonstration projects, so as to lead CCUS development with a
complete series technical products and standardised models that
can be replicated, promoted to and adopted by others.
storage, Shengli Oilfield has built 10 unmanned gas injection
stations to flood 73 wells nearby with to carbon dioxide,
which will increase the fluidity of crude oil and boost crude
oil recovery rate significantly. All oil and gas collection and
transportation systems are close-loop pipeline systems, which
further increase the carbon dioxide storage rate.
Completed on January 29, 2022, the project is expected to reduce
carbon dioxide emission by 1 million tonnes per year, which is
the equivalent of planting nearly 9 million trees, or driving nearly
600,000 economical-sized cars for a year. The project is also
expected to boost crude oil production by nearly 3 million tonnes
in the next 15 years. This is the largest CCUS full industrial
chain demonstration base and project in China to date, and has
a significant demonstration impact on the scale-up of CCUS in
China, as well as on increasing China's carbon emission reduction
capabilities with an "artificial carbon cycle" model.
Sinopec Corp. attaches great importance to addressing climate change through controlling
methane emissions. The Company has actively implemented methane emission reduction
measures, comprehensively promoted measures such as methane leakage detection and
repair, venting gas recycling, and closed process upgrade, striving to reduce its methane
emissions intensity by 50% by 2025 (taking 2020 as the base year). In 2021, Sinopec Corp.'s
methane emission reached 299.90 million cubic metres, while methane recovery reached 717
million cubic metres, with a 19.5% increase year-on-year.
Sinopec Corp. actively participated in the national carbon emission trading market, developed
trading plans and strategies, drafted, and issued the Sinopec Carbon Trading Administration
Measures during the year, and further standardised the fulfilment of carbon quotas. The
Company leveraged the advantages of its integrated system by making comprehensive
arrangement based on carbon quota surpluses and shortages of its subsidiaries, and leveraged
its capability expertise and established a dedicated carbon trading team. With scientifically
formulated carbon trading plans and centralised management of carbon trading, the Company
ensured that all its subsidiaries fulfilled their carbon quotas on schedule. By the end of 2021,
Sinopec Corp. had 23 subsidiaries participated in the national carbon trading market, with a
carbon trading volume of 4.56 million tonnes and a 100% carbon quota fulfilment rate.
Sinopec Corp. fully embraces the green development concept, and integrates facility
greening with building green enterprise. The Company encourages all employees to
take part in nationwide volunteer tree planting, to both increase the forest reserve and
maximises forest's comprehensive effects on carbon reduction, carbon storage, and
ecological improvement.
Employees are encouraged to
participate in "cloud tree planting"
activities via Ant Forest, online
donation, forest adoption, etc. In 2021,
our employees donated RMB 1.2 million
to plant trees through the National
Voluntary Tree Planting Network,
China Greening Foundation, local tree
planting websites and other online
platforms, which was the equivalent to
planting 78,000 trees.
Encouraged subsidiaries to carry out
environmental activities in accordance with
local conditions, such as facility greening,
desert greening, Yangtze River protection
and shoreline greening, ecological protection
of the Yellow River Basin, joint construction
of voluntary tree planting bases, etc.
In the Yangtze River Basin, Jinling
Petrochemical, Yangzi Petrochemical and
Baling Petrochemical carried out ecological
greening along the river and voluntary
tree planting events named "Building the
Most Beautiful Yangtze River Banks" and
"Protecting the Mother River".
The total amount of current green space is
117.944 million square metres, with a year-on-
year increase of 1.3%.
During the year, 0.755 million square metres of
green space was newly built or restored.
The greening rate of the industrial area of the
Company was 27.7%, and the green coverage
rate was 30.6%.
A total of 2.012 million trees were
planted by employee volunteers
during various occasions throughout
the year, increased by 309,000 trees
year-on-year.
The newly planted trees were
expected to reduce 20,000 tonnes of
carbon per year as carbon sink.
Methane Monitoring
Pilot
Formulated Sinopec's Guiding Opinions on the Domestic Upstream Methane
Emission Control, strengthened the application of closed mixed transmission
process regarding the four major processes oil and gas exploration, extraction,
gathering and transportation, and refining and processing, and the two
emission forms of venting and escape, and actively implemented measures
such as the recovery of casing gas, comprehensive utilisation of flare gas,
and recovery from remote scattered wells. In 2021, our oilfield subsidiaries
recovered approximately 717 million cubic metres of methane, which was the
equivalent to a greenhouse gas emissions reduction of approximately 10.75
million tonnes of carbon dioxide.
The oil refining and chemical subsidiaries continued to strengthen the
management of flare system and implemented a number of key measures,
including setting reasonable high/low limit for early warning and integrating
the liquid level control of gas holder into the irregularity response system for
intervention; balancing the fuel gas pipe network and hydrogen pipe network
to prevent the fuel gas and hydrogen pipe network from venting to the flare
system; and strengthening source control and ensuring smooth operation of oil
refining units to reduce unexpected shutdown and flare discharges.
Methane Recovery and
Utilisation
Jointly initiated the
founding of China Oil
and Gas Methane
Alliance enterprises, and
signed the joint initiative
on methane emission
control of the Alliance,
aiming at build a lasting
and inclusive platform to
promote collaboration and
exchange, so as to help
oil and gas enterprises
improve methane control
capabilities and cooperate
on technological innovation
to reduce methane
emissions.
As a national pilot for carbon
emission monitoring and
assessment for the oil and
gas extraction industry,
Sinopec Corp. formulated
the Sinopec Implementation
Plan of Methane Monitoring
and Assessment Pilot
Projects, and implemented
a series measures, including
personnel monitoring,
satellite remote sensing,
cruising observation, drone
sensing, etc., to monitor the
methane concentration in
escape, process venting, and
flare combustion.
Promote Industry-wide
Emission Control
Luoyang Petrochemical coexists in harmony with the Yellow River
In the Yellow River Basin, Luoyang
Petrochemical carried out tree planting
activities in the Yellow River Wetland
Nature Reserve.
Huabei Oilfield, Inner Mongolia
Petroleum organised their employees to
participate in tree planting activities for
soil and water conservation in barren
mountain and desert areas.
The Petroleum Engineering
Construction Co., Ltd. established
a 300 mu charity tree planting base
Hangjinqi Banner, Inner Mongolia
Sinopec Corp. takes "green and clean" as one of its core development strategies, adheres to
ecological priority, green transition, and clean development, promotes the clean utilisation of
fossil energy, scaling-up of clean energy, and low-carbon production process, strives to reduce
energy consumption and emission intensity, and control and reduce total emissions, and actively
develops and provides green, low-carbon, and environment-friendly products, allowing the
Company to become an industry model for green, clean, and low-carbon development.
As a fossil energy with low carbon emission intensity, natural gas plays a key role in the energy
transition process. Sinopec Corp. is committed to planning and promoting the development of
the natural gas business at a strategic level, coordinating natural gas resources and markets,
promoting the development of the full-scale industrial chain system of natural gas, and striving
to help increase natural gas's share in domestic primary energy consumption. In 2021, the
Company's natural gas production reached 1,199.4 billion cubic feet, with an increase of 11.9%
year-on-year.
The development of hydrogen energy is one of the essential paths to achieving the
transformation of global energy structure to cleaner and low-carbon models. Sinopec Corp.
has extensive industrial experience and competitive advantages in the hydrogen energy
sector. Taking hydrogen energy as the main direction for its new energy business, the
Company leverages its industry, technology, and network resources to build an integrated and
collaborative operation mode, covering hydrogen energy production, hydrogen energy mobility,
hydrogen energy technology, and hydrogen energy investment, through independent innovation,
collaborative R&D, and strategic investment, building its own whole process industrial chain of
hydrogen energy production, purification, transportation, and sales
Aiming at achieving the goal of "low-carbon energy for production,
and clean energy for consumption", develop and use clean
energy such as wind energy and solar energy available onsite, to
enhance low-carbon development capabilities of the subsidiaries.
Explored hydrogen energy application scenarios, invested in key processes
of hydrogen production, storage and transportation, and filling, and strove to
gradually expand the proportion of green hydrogen supply, and take lead in
the strategic development of the hydrogen energy industry.
Actively constructed distributed photovoltaic power generation projects,
building a total of 1,253 distributed photovoltaic power generation projects
cumulatively (including 1,048 completed in 2021) with a total installed
capacity of 43.8 MW. Accelerated the deployment of "carbon-neutral" vehicle
refuelling stations, including the construction of China's first carbon-neutral
gas station in 2021, to speed up the low-carbon development process
Adjusted the heavy oil refining structure, promoted product quality
improvement, and developed new green energy-saving materials with high
added value and advanced technologies.
Adhering to the principles of "integration of hydrogen and electricity, green
hydrogen and carbon reduction", actively implemented centralised wind
power and photovoltaic generation projects on refining and chemical industrial
facilities, carried out the "large-scale renewable energy power generation
- energy storage - hydrogen production with green electricity" project, and
gradually promote green power utilisation and green hydrogen refining, so as
to achieve in-depth de-carbonisation in the refining and chemical sectors.
Conduct in-depth waste heat utilisation to tap the recovery and reuse
potential of waste heating and cooling energy in the production process,
which could be used in production, power generation, heating, or
refrigeration on the facilities and for nearby users
On February 4, 2022, at the opening ceremony of the
Beijing Winter Olympics, hydrogen provided by Sinopec
Corp. was used as fuel for the main torch of the venue,
fully reflecting the green and low-carbon concept of the
event. Unlike the previous winter Olympics, which used
liquefied natural gas or propane as torch fuel, for the first
time, the main torch of the Beijing Winter Olympics and the
domestic relay torch all used hydrogen energy provided by
Sinopec. This was an arrangement that truly representing
the combination of the Olympic spirit with "green" and
"environmental protection" concepts.
Ever since becoming the official oil and gas partner of
the Beijing Winter Olympics in July 2018, Sinopec Corp.
accelerated the low-cost development and utilisation of
hydrogen energy and started the construction of a new
hydrogen energy supply project for the Beijing Winter
Olympics through its subsidiary, Yanshan Petrochemical. In
March 2020, the hydrogen new energy device successfully
produced high-quality hydrogen, which met all national
standards and requirements for hydrogen fuel cell vehicle
hydrogen, and successfully passed the inspection by the
Winter Olympic Organising Committee.
Sinopec Clean Hydrogen at Bird's Nest
Meanwhile, Sinopec Corp. also provided high-quality
hydrogen fuel for hydrogen vehicles for the Winter Olympic
Games. The extensive use of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles
during the Beijing Winter Olympics made this Game the
world's largest demonstration project of utilising hydrogen fuel
cell vehicles, both reducing pollutant emissions and reflecting
the principles of green, low-carbon and sustainability of the
Beijing Winter Olympics. Sinopec Corp. built four Winter
Olympics hydrogen refuelling stations, accumulatively serving
12,600 trips of various Winter Olympics vehicles, filling 148
tonnes of hydrogen
100% of hydrogen produced with non-fossil energy; develop
a fully functional and nationwide low-carbon transportation
energy supply network to help the national road
transportation system achieve carbon neutrality in advance.
2050 Hydrogen Energy Vision
Progress and Achievements of Hydrogen Energy Business
Green hydrogen refiningHydrogen energy mobility
H2
Hydrogen Refuelling
Station
Actively promoted the deployment of hydrogen refuelling stations by relying on over 30,000 refuelling
stations nationwide, and taking into consideration regional city cluster development plans, market needs
and application scenarios, and the opportunity of the Beijing Winter Olympic Games and the construction
of Xiong'an New Area.
Built and operates 74 hydrogenation stations, with a total hydrogen refuelling capacity of about 45
tonnes/day, making the Company the global leader in number of hydrogen refuelling stations.
In 2021, the Company had provided refuelling service to about 2,000 hydrogen fuel vehicles with an
annual hydrogen filling volume over 800 tonnes.
Hydrogen Supply As of the end of 2021, eight hydrogen supply centres had been built to provide high-purity hydrogen for
fuel cells, with a capacity of 16,000 standard cubic metres/hour.
In the next five years, Sinopec Corp. will
accelerate the development of new energy
business with hydrogen energy as the core,
firmly promote the rapid development of
the whole hydrogen energy industrial chain
in two major fields of hydrogen energy
mobility and green hydrogen refining. The
Company will further strengthen cooperation
with leading enterprises in new energy and
hydrogen energy manufacturing, plan and
layout hydrogen refuelling stations or gas-
hydrogen hybrid stations, and strive to build
China's leading hydrogen energy enterprise
and an industry forerunner of commercial
demonstration projects.
In October 2021, Shanghai Petroleum's
Qingwei hybrid station was officially
completed, which can serve hydrogen
vehicles with both 35 MPa and 70 MPa
hydrogen fuel cells
Sinopec Crop. has thoroughly implemented the "Photovoltaic+" action, fully combined rooftop
photovoltaic power generation at gas stations with energy conservation, carbon reduction, and
brand marketing. The Company promoted the construction of Building Integrated Photovoltaic
(BIPV) on the spare space on rooftop of more than 30,000 gas stations in China, developed
distributed photovoltaic power generation, and built "Carbon Neutral" gas stations. The
Company plans to build 7,000 distributed photovoltaic power generation stations by 2025,
generating power to serve both the energy needs of the stations and the charging needs
of electric vehicles. As the end of 2021, Sinopec Corp. has built 1,253 photovoltaic power
generation stations with a total installed generation capacity of 43.8 MW.
Promote the Construction of Carbon Neutral Gas Stations
The Company carried out the "Photovoltaic +" action and build distributed photovoltaic power
generation units on rooftop of gas stations, with a number of carbon neutral gas stations
completed, such as the Jiaze Station in Changzhou City, Jiangsu Province, and Liuhua Station
in Baise City, Guangxi Autonomous Region. The generated power not only fully offset the
implied carbon dioxide emission of the purchased power of the gas station, but also partially
contribute to additional reduction of carbon emissions. These stations have already passed
the certification by professional authorities of its carbon neutrality.
Sinopec Corp. actively promotes the development of biofuels and increases the production,
promotion and supply of biomass energy.
Sinopec Corp. fully grasps the development opportunities of new energy vehicles, strives to
participate in the development of new energy vehicle-related businesses with a high starting
point and high standards. The Company cooperated closely with leading enterprises of the
industry and leveraged the location advantages of its gas stations to speed up the expansion
of charging and replacement capacity, added fast charging, super-charge equipment and
facilities in gas stations to help solve the charging challenge for electric vehicle owners.
Regarding battery replacement, Sinopec Corp. continued to lead the industrial development
and technological progress of the industry, cooperated with relevant enterprises to build C-end
and B-end battery replacement stations, and actively promoted the power bank service.
In the next serval years (2021-2025), the Company plans to build 5,000 charging and
replacement refuelling stations.
Continued to expand the supply of
bio-diesel in Shanghai and other
cities. The blending capacity of
B5 bio-diesel reached over 400
thousand tonnes , and could cover
more than 240 gas stations in
Shanghai. The Company has made
the plan to build a 100,000 tonnes/
year bio-diesel project during the
14th Five-Year Plan period.
Promoted ethanol gasoline for
vehicles based on market trends.
A total of 14.925 million tonnes of
ethanol gasoline was sold in 2021.
Established bio jet fuel production
facility to produce bio jet fuel from
renewable resources such as
catering waste oil, animal grease
and vegetable oil, etc., with a
production capacity of 100,000
tonnes/year. In the future, the
Company will continue to strengthen
R&D investment to develop low-
cost and high-efficiency production
technology, and reduce the
production cost of bio jet fuel.
Bio-diesel Ethanol GasolineBio Jet Fuel
Plans to build 7,000
distributed photovoltaic power generation
stations by 2025
Built 1,253
photovoltaic power generation
stations
Charging and replacement
Cooperated with mainstream new energy
vehicle enterprises, and accelerated the
rolling-out of charging and replace stations. By
the end of 2021, the Company had built 1,212
charging stations, 83 replacement stations and
4,867 charging piles.
Established and supported world's first fully
intelligent power exchange station (Beijing
Chaoying).
Developed a series of environmentally
friendly lightweight non-metallic materials with
outstanding performance, some of which met
international advanced standards and were
well recognised by well-known automotive
enterprises.
Produced nearly 400,000 tonnes of special
automotive component materials for 35 car
brands, and trial produced 29 automotive
parts at over 40 automotive and components
companies.