TotalEnergies supports the objectives of the Paris Agreement, which calls for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the context of sustainable development and eradicating poverty, and which aims to hold the increase in the planet’s average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels. To achieve these targets, the world’s energy systems need to be transformed. This dual challenge consisting of providing more energy to as many people as possible with less GHG emissions concerns society as a whole, with governments, investors, companies and consumers all playing an important role.

At the heart of the climate stakes, TotalEnergies' aim is to provide as many people as possible with energy that is more reliable, more affordable and more sustainable. In this context, the Company’s ambition is to reach carbon neutrality (net zero emissions) by 2050 together with society
In order to contribute concrete responses to the issue of climate change, TotalEnergies relies on a structured organization and governance.

Climate issues are addressed at the highest level of the organization by the Board of Directors and the Executive Committee, which have fully committed to transforming TotalEnergies into an integrated energy company and a major player in the energy transition. The Chairman and Chief Executive Officer with the members of his Executive Committee as well as the Lead Independent Director participate all year long to a nourished dialogue with shareholders and different stakeholders on the Company's climate issues. As an illustration, on April 4 and 5, 2023, the Lead Independent Director exchanged with diverse shareholders representing close to 20% of the share capital of TotalEnergies SE. These meetings have been the opportunity of a dialogue about the transition strategy of TotalEnergies, its progress and the update of its climate ambition.

The Board of Directors also reports annually to the shareholders on the progress made. As in 2022 and 2021, the Board of Directors submitted at the Annual Shareholders' Meeting on May 26, 2023 to the shareholders of TotalEnergies SE for their opinion the Sustainability & Climate Progress Report 2023, reporting on the progress made in the implementation of the Corporation's ambition in terms of sustainable development and energy transition towards carbon neutrality and its related targets by 2030, and complementing this ambition. This resolution was approved by close to 89% of the votes cast.

In support of the Company’s governance bodies, the Sustainability and Climate division shapes the approach to climate and accompanies the strategic and operational divisions of the Company’s business segments. By defining and monitoring indicators, progress can be measured and the Company’s actions can be adjusted (details of the indicators used are provided in point 5.4.4 of this chapter).
TotalEnergies’ Board of Directors endeavors to promote value creation by the business in the long term by taking into consideration the social and environmental challenges of its business activities. It determines the Company’s strategic orientation and regularly reviews, in connection with this strategic orientation, the opportunities and risks such as financial, legal, operating, social and environmental risks, and the measures taken as a result. It thus ensures that climate-related issues are incorporated into the Company’s strategy and the investment projects that are submitted to it. It examines climate change risks and opportunities during the annual strategic outlook review of the Company’s business segments. It reviews performance each year.

The skills of the directors in the area of climate are presented in section 4.1.1.5 of chapter 4. A continuing training program relating to the climate for directors has been approved in 2021 and it includes different modules about the following themes: Energy, Climate Change and Environmental Risks; Energy and Climate; Climate Change and Financial Risks and Opportunities; Causes and challenges of global warming. In 2022, as part of this training program, directors participated in the Climate Fresco (a scientific, collaborative and creative workshop designed to raise awareness of climate change and in particular its causes and consequences). In 2023, several Directors attended individual climate-related trainings, either in-person or via digital courses.

Directors are invited to Company's site visits. The visits contribute in a very concrete way to the training of Directors and allow them to deepen their knowledge of the specificities of the Company, its challenges, its businesses - including new businesses - and its teams. They are often the occasion for thematic presentations. 

In this context, site visits were organized in 2023, by groups of directors accompanied by a member of the Executive Committee, in Congo (Exploration & Production, Marketing & Services, Nature Based Solution), in Qatar (LNG, Renewable, Exploration & Production), in Texas (Refining, Renewables, Trading) and, in France, at Pau (Technical Center, Biogas, Methane R&D) and at La Mède (biofuels, renewables, local development).

To carry out its work, the Board of Directors relies on its Strategy & CSR Committee, whose Rules of procedure were amended first in September 2017, and again in July 2018 in order to broaden its missions in the realm of CSR and in questions relating to the inclusion of climate-related issues in the Company’s strategy. In this regard, the Strategy & CSR Committee held on September 20 and 21, 2023 a strategy seminar to review the following topics: energy demand analysis scenarios, hydrogen activity and a presentation dedicated to the Integrated Power activity. At this occasion, Directors exchanged views with Dan Yergin, Vice President of S&P Global, on the challenges of energy transition in the United States and worldwide. The strategy seminar also provided an opportunity to examine the levers of Integrated Power's profitability, as well as the state of technology and the evaluation of the costs of hydrogen.

The Audit Committee, which is already reviewing the extra-financial performance declaration, has taken steps to take on the new tasks arising from the regulations on the reporting of sustainability information. In particular, it will monitor the process of drawing up the sustainability report that will succeed the extra-financial performance declaration, and which will be published for the first time in 2025 in relation to the 2024 financial year. It also monitors the certification of sustainability information.

The Board of Directors has also been integrating climate issues into the compensation structures for several years. The criteria for determining the variable part of the compensation of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer include quantitative criteria related to the evolution of greenhouse gas emissions on the operated facilities (Scope 1+2), and since 2024, related to the Integrated Power cash flow (CFFO) generation. The evaluation of the personal contribution of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer provide qualitative criteria that also include climate issues, through criteria related to (i) steering the transformation strategy towards carbon neutrality, in line with the 2020/2030 targets announced to investors, in particular the increase of gas and power production, as well as the evolution of its sales mix, (ii) profitable growth in renewables and electricity, as well as (iii) CSR performance assessed notably through the integration of climate issues in the Company’s Strategy, the Company’s commitment and ratings regarding CSR, as well as the policy of diversity.

The variable compensation of the Company's senior executives (approximately 300 people at the end of 2023) includes a criterion linked to the achievement of the GHG emissions reduction target.

Since 2020, the criteria for awarding performance shares to the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer and to all the Company's employees also include performance conditions related to climate-targets (refer to point 4.3.2 in chapter 4).
The Executive Committee chaired by the Chairman & Chief Executive Officer ensures that climate-related issues are taken into account and built into operational roadmaps. The Executive Committee is responsible for identifying and analyzing risks that could affect the achievement of TotalEnergies' objectives.

The TotalEnergies Risk Management Committee (TRMC) assists the Executive Committee. The TRMC’s primary duties are to ensure that the Company's risk mapping is updated on a regular basis and that its existing risk management processes, procedures and systems are effective.

The Strategy & Sustainability Division coordinates the Company's activities through the entities in charge of strategy and markets analysis, sustainability and climate, and also safety, health and environment, legal affairs, relations with public authorities and internal audit. Its President also chairs the Risk Committee (CoRisk) which is in charge of the Company's investments.

The Finance Division ensures an ongoing dialogue with investors, analysts and extra-financial rating agencies on climate challenges and on extra-financial issues more broadly. In all, more than 450 meetings were held in France and worldwide in 2023.
The risks and opportunities related to climate change are analyzed according to different timescales: short term (two years), medium term (until 2030) and long term (beyond 2030).

The identification and the impact of climate-related risks form an integral part of TotalEnergies’s global risk management processes. In particular, they cover the risks related to transition including those due to regulatory changes, such as the introduction of carbon taxes, as well as the physical risks due to the effects of climate change. The impact of these risks is analyzed for the Company’s assets and for investment projects (refer to point 3.1.1 of chapter 3).

To achieve carbon neutrality, the energy mix will need to change and in view of this, climate change also provides TotalEnergies with opportunities. In the coming decades, demand for electricity will grow faster than the global demand for energy269, and the contribution of renewables and gas to the production of electricity will therefore play an essential role in the fight against climate change. Electricity alone will not be sufficient to meet all needs, particularly those connected to transportation. 

Gas and sustainable biofuels will be attractive and credible alternatives to conventional fuels and the Company intends to develop them. The development of gas production is accompanied by measures to control methane and CO2 emissions (Scope 1+2). This development could be accompanied by an increasing share of biogas. The development of hydrogen could also contribute to meeting energy demand.

Helping customers improve their energy efficiency also offers opportunities and forms part of a trend that will be accelerated by digital technology. TotalEnergies wants to be innovative and bring them new product and service offerings. The Company aims to develop this approach for industrial and mobility applications.

In addition, ecosystems, and forests in particular, store carbon naturally. Consequently, their conservation and the restoration of their role as carbon sinks are crucially important in the fight against global warming. TotalEnergies therefore intends to maintain its investment in the development of natural carbon sinks.

Finally, certain sectors, such as cement and steel, could struggle to reduce their GHG emissions. They will therefore require carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) technology. Consequently, the Company intends to step up the development of CCUS.
Energy is an essential resource, everywhere indispensable for living: for food, lighting, heating and cooling, transport, healthcare, construction and trade.

Historically, energy demand has grown in line with demographic growth and rising living standards, as illustrated hereafter since 2000.

The world's population is set to grow by almost 2 billion additional inhabitants by 2050. This prospect will have significant implications for achieving the UN's Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to improve prosperity and social well-being while protecting the environment and biodiversity.

In the countries of the Global South, where access to energy is already one of the limiting factors in human development, populations aspire to improve their quality of life.

In OECD countries, energy has enabled socio-economic development that no country is prepared to forego.

The IPCC reiterated in 2021270 that global warming is the consequence of greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions linked to human activities, and warned of the environmental and socio-economic impacts of this already tangible climate change.

"TotalEnergies supports the Paris Agreement."

Since the Paris Agreement in 2015, States have jointly pledged "to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and the fight to eradicate poverty, in particular by holding the increase in global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels".

The energy system must therefore be transformed, because energy is at the heart of this global climate challenge: GHG emissions linked to the production or use of energy account for over 60% of global emissions in 2021 (ref. IPCC & IEA), as the global energy system is still 80% relying on fossil fuels.

There is an urgent need to accelerate the development of a decarbonized energy system, while maintaining the current energy system at a level sufficient to meet global demand and organize a just, orderly and equitable transition of energy systems.
TotalEnergies welcomes the agreement reached in Dubai that calls for "transitioning away from fossil fuels" in a "just, orderly and equitable manner." Within this framework, TotalEnergies notes with interest the agreement's reference to transitional fuels such as gas.

TotalEnergies supports the objectives of tripling the amount of renewable energy and doubling energy efficiency by 2030, as well as slashing methane emissions within that time frame. These objectives are at the heart of TotalEnergies' roadmap for 2030.

This agreement reinforces TotalEnergies' transition strategy, which aims, on the one hand, to contribute to the development of a new decarbonized energy system based on electricity and renewables, in which gas plays a useful role as a flexible transitional energy; and, on the other hand, to support a just, orderly and equitable transition away from fossil fuels, notably in emerging countries that legitimately aspire to economic and social development for their populations.

Given the energy-related emissions as shown in the chart hereafter, reducing the associated emissions implies in the short term: 

–Minimising the share of coal in the electricity mix, starting from OECD countries,

–Decarbonizing the road transport sector (currently 90% powered by petroleum products),

–Aiming for the elimination of methane emissions from fossil fuel production processes.

To achieve this, massive investments are needed, not only in renewable energy, but also in electricity networks and systems enabling to ensure the availability of the new electricity system.

Another challenge is to reduce fossil fuel consumption at the right pace. In the Global South, fossil fuels remain an affordable solution for providing growing populations with access to energy, and therefore greater prosperity.

In OECD countries, an accelerated transition means retiring existing assets at country, industry and household levels, and investing in new low-carbon assets.

The transition will not take place without social acceptability (both between North and South and within OECD countries) and without genuine efforts in terms of climate justice.

Accelerating the pace of investment in low-carbon energies requires strong cooperation between the private and public sectors: 

–In OECD countries, simplify and speed up the permitting process to accelerate the deployment of grids and renewable energies.

–Actively support the transition of the Global South through (i) the development of multilateral financial guarantees essential to project financing and (ii) the deployment of training programs to support the local implementation of new technological solutions.
TotalEnergies reaffirms the relevance of its balanced integrated multi-energy strategy considering the developments in the oil, gas and electricity markets. Anchored on two pillars, Oil & Gas, notably LNG, and electricity, the energy at the heart of the energy transition, the Company is in a very favorable position to take advantage of energy prices evolution. Thanks to the refocusing of the Oil & Gas portfolio on assets and projects with low breakeven and low GHG emissions, and to the diversification into electricity, notably renewable, through an integrated strategy from production to customer, the Company is implementing its transition strategy while ensuring an attractive shareholder return policy.

b.…responsibly producing low cost, low emission Oil & Gas

While drastically lowering the emissions from its operations, TotalEnergies plans to grow its Oil & Gas production by 2-3% per year over the next five years, predominantly from LNG, thanks to its rich low cost low emission Upstream portfolio.

The Company plans notably to develop a top-tier pipeline of LNG projects (Qatar North Field Expansion, Papua LNG, Energía Costa Azul LNG and Rio Grande in the US, Mozambique LNG) while leveraging its leading position in Europe in regasification and its leading LNG exporter position in the United States.

TotalEnergies plans to launch the production of its portfolio of high-return oil projects (Brazil, Gulf of Mexico, Iraq, Uganda) recently enriched with exploration successes in Suriname and Namibia.

The key indicator of our progress on this pillar is the reduction in Scope 1+2 emissions because our first duty as a producer of hydrocarbons is to reduce the GHG emissions linked to their production.

c.…and developing a profitable and differentiated Integrated Power model to create a future cash engine of the Company

TotalEnergies is replicating its integrated Oil & Gas business model into the electricity value chain to achieve a profitability (ROACE273) of ~12% for the Integrated Power segment, equivalent to Upstream Oil & Gas ROACE at 60 $/b, above the returns of the traditional Utilities model.

The Company is building a world class cost-competitive portfolio combining renewable (solar, onshore wind, offshore wind) and flexible assets (CCGT, storage) to deliver low-carbon electricity available 24/7. In particular, TotalEnergies is leveraging its scale effect in equipment purchase to optimize its investment costs and industrialize its renewable assets through digital to lower operating costs. TotalEnergies also uses the strength of its balance sheet to keep market exposure, allowing it to capture additional margins in a market exposure.

The Company aims to grow its power generation to more than 100 TWh by 2030, investing around $4 billion per year; the generated cash flow of this segment was $2.2 billion in 2023 and will be more than $4 billion in 2028, becoming net cash-flow positive at that time.

Additionally, TotalEnergies invests in low-carbon molecules (biofuels and biogas, as well as hydrogen and its derivatives: e-fuels and SAF).

The key indicator of our progress to measure our transition towards low-carbon energy products is the lifecycle carbon intensity274 of the products used by the Company's customers. It divides the lifecycle emissions (from production to final use) of our energy products sold (Scope 1+2+3) by the quantity of energy supplied (g CO2e/MJ). The reduction in carbon intensity275 reflects the lower carbon content of the energy sold to our customers and the Company’s progress in implementing its transition strategy.
4.A Net Zero Company by 2050 together with society

TotalEnergies reaffirms its ambition to be a major player in the energy transition and shares a vision of what its activities could be to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, together with society.

By 2050, TotalEnergies would produce:

–about 50% of its energy in the form of electricity, including the corresponding storage capacity, totaling around 500 TWh/year, on the premise that TotalEnergies would develop about 400 GW of gross renewable capacity;

–about 25% of its energy, equivalent to 50 Mt/year of low-carbon energy molecules in the form of biogas, hydrogen, or synthetic liquid fuels from the circular reaction: H2 + CO2 k e-fuels;

–around 1 Mboe/d of Oil & Gas (about a quarter of the production in 2030, consistent with the decline envisaged by the IEA's Net Zero scenario), primarily liquefied natural gas (about 0.7 Mboe/d, or 25-30 Mt/year) with very low-cost oil accounting for the rest. Most of that oil would be used in the petrochemicals industry to produce about 10 Mt/year of polymers, of which two thirds would come from the circular economy.Reducing GHG emissions at our operated facilities (Scope 1+2) is key to our ambition to supply more energy while curbing GHG emissions. Our objective of cutting net Scope 1+2 emissions from our operated activities by 40% is consistent with the reduction targets of the European Union’s “Fit-for-55” program (a 37% decrease between 2015 and 2030) and the IEA’s 2023 Net Zero Emissions (NZE) scenario (a 31% decrease between 2015 and 2030).

Our targets for lowering the lifecycle carbon intensity278 of energy products sold (a 15% reduction by 2025 and a 25% reduction by 2030) put the Company on a trajectory close to the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) in the IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2023, which assumes that the States parties to the Paris Agreement fulfill all their net zero objectives.

An independent third party (Wood Mackenzie) has audited the calculations made and the trajectories presented.
7.A strategy to reduce our client's emissions

By 2030, we intend to reduce the emissions linked to the energy we supply to our customers by 25% compared to 2015. In other words, we intend to decrease by 25% the carbon intensity279 of energy products sold, which accounts for the lifecycle emissions (Scope 1+2+3) of our energy products per unit of energy sold (g CO2e/MJ).

Indeed, by offering to our clients an increasingly decarbonized portfolio, we contribute to the energy transition and help our clients reduce their emissions.

In 2023 we maintained our progress thanks to sales growth of renewable energy by notching a 13% reduction in the lifecycle carbon intensity280 of our products compared to 2015.

Growth in electricity will drive more than half the reduction in its lifecycle carbon intensity281 between 2015 and 2030. The other factors will be the reduction in sales of petroleum products coupled with an increase in gas production (particularly LNG) and sales of products derived from biomass. Lastly, lower emissions from our facilities will contribute to 10% of the intensity282 reduction.

As a producer of renewable power, biogas and biofuels, a supplier of natural gas and electricity and a leader in electric mobility, we are also helping our customers reduce their emissions with our customized solutions and developing CO2 storage solutions for industrial customers.

Established in 2022, TotalEnergies OneB2B Solutions boasts more than thirty experts who assist our largest customers across nearly a dozen industries in fulfilling their ambitions for the energy transition, thanks to solutions tailored to their needs. Over the past 2 years, we engaged 334 large B2B clients on their Scope 1+2.
In 2023, global demand for petroleum products reached 101.8 Mb/d, i.e. +2.3 Mb/d compared to 2022, and should continue to grow over the decade according to the IEA (105.7 Mb/d by 2028)285. These demand forecasts remain dependent in particular on population and economic growth, market penetration pace of low-carbon technology innovations such as electric vehicles and changes in behavior.

In addition, it will evolve in a differentiated way according to the specific energy transition roadmaps of the various countries.

Thus, demand for oil could start to decline around 2030, but at a slower rate than the current natural decline rate of existing fields (around 4% per year).

TotalEnergies therefore believes that new oil projects are still needed to meet this demand and to keep prices at an acceptable level in order to create the conditions for a just transition that allows people time to adapt their energy use. In 2023, TotalEnergies produced 1.4 Mb/d of oil, equivalent to its 2019 level, representing around 1.5% of world production.

The first responsibility of TotalEnergies as an oil producer is to produce differently, meaning while minimizing emissions.

To that end, we approve hydrocarbon projects on the basis of performance criteria, notably technical costs and carbon intensity (Scope 1+2). We operate our fields in accordance with strict requirements concerning safety, emissions reduction and environmental impact. The cash flow generated by these Oil & Gas activities contributes to accelerating our investments in renewable energy.
Our primary responsibility as a producer of fossil fuels is to substantially reduce emissions on our facilities. We are resolutely continuing to reduce emissions from our operated sites. Across the 2015 scope of our Oil & Gas activities, emissions from our operated assets fell by more than 34% from 2015 levels, dropping from 46 to 30 Mt CO2e in 2023 (a decrease by 36% for Oil & Gas operated upstream and a decrease by 32% in Refining & Chemicals).

In 2023, with more than 140 GHG emissions reduction projects coming to fruition, we reduced our emissions by 1.5 Mt CO2e across our operated assets.

These ongoing reduction efforts have made it possible to reduce the Scope 1+2 equity intensity of our Upstream Oil & Gas assets, from 20 kg CO2e/boe in 2020 to 18 kg CO2e/boe in 2023286. These results put us among the players with the best intensities in the industry.
TotalEnergies reaffirms its decarbonization objective, which aims to reduce its Scope 1+2 net emissions by -40% to 2030 compared to 2015, net of 5-10 Mt of natural carbon sinks.

Our objectives include emissions generated by the growth strategy in electricity we have pursued since 2015, which has prompted us to create a flexible power generation portfolio of plants (CCGT).

In 2023, GHG emissions from our operated assets were 24% lower than in 2015, standing at close to 35 million tons of CO2e. Between 2022 and 2023, the reduction in these emissions is 13%. It is mainly due to lower utilization rate of CCGTs, emissions reduction projects, such as for example the reduction of burning in Angola, and Nigeria, and the improvement of energy efficiency.

To achieve our 2030 target, we are mobilizing every tool at our disposal to avoid and reduce emissions from our operations. Compensation from natural carbon sinks will only begin from 2030 onwards, to offset residual emissions in pursuit of our objective, on the basis of a consumption of about 10% of our stock of carbon credit units per year.
Generating energy savings in our operations is beneficial in several ways: we contribute to the collective campaign for energy efficiency, we help to reduce our carbon emissions and we lower our costs.

In September 2022, TotalEnergies launched a plan to accelerate energy efficiency gains at its operated sites worldwide. We are investing $1 billion in efforts to further reduce our energy use.

This plan, centered on four key levers, will support the measures adopted over the past several years within the Company’s business segments. Each business segment has developed a plan to accelerate its energy savings, with more than 150 initiatives logged at Exploration & Production, over 200 projects at Refining & Chemicals and more than 40 initiatives at Marketing & Services and Gas, Renewables & Power.

To keep up with these efforts, a growing number of sites are ISO 50001 certified. The projects already identified which will be launched in 2024 should make it possible to achieve the reduction objective of 2 Mt CO2e.
In the gas markets, TotalEnergies focuses on Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), which can be shipped everywhere in the world and thus contributes to energy security, as it has been the case in Europe since 2022 with the strong reduction of Russian pipeline gas deliveries.

The growth of renewable electricity, intermittent and seasonal by nature, will require an increase in flexible power generation resources. The flexible production of gas-fired power plants, which emit half as much GHG as coal-fired power plants for the same amount of electricity produced287, enables to secure electricity generation which does not depends on weather conditions contrary to renewable energy, and to face demand fluctuations.

In addition, natural gas plays an essential role in reducing emissions from power generation as a replacement of coal, particularly in Asia where this one still accounts for a very large part of the electricity mix of many countries (e.g. 63% in China, 72% in India)288.

With diversified positions, and in particular its leading position of exporter in the United States - over 10 Mt in 2023 - TotalEnergies is the 3rd world's largest LNG player, with 44 Mt sold in 2023. The Company intends to consolidate its position as an integrated player by developing a first-class portfolio that will enable it to achieve 50% growth in volumes between 2023 and 2030.

Reducing the carbon footprint of the LNG portfolio 

TotalEnergies aims to gradually reduce GHG emissions of the value chain, from the production of the gas to end use.

In addition to efforts to reduce methane emissions, initiatives are being implemented throughout the whole chain. The electrification of liquefaction plant processes is helping to reduce LNG’s carbon footprint today, and tomorrow this reduction will be reinforced by CO2 capture and storage projects. 

We are also working to reduce shipping emissions by renewing our fleet of chartered LNG carriers with modern, high-performance vessels.
Methane is a greenhouse gas with a global warming potential 30 times higher than that of CO2 and a much shorter atmospheric lifetime289. This makes reducing methane emissions a priority in efforts to mitigate global warming. To date, more than 150 countries have signed the Global Methane Pledge launched in Glasgow in 2021, which aims to reduce methane emissions by 30% from 2020 levels by 2030. Anthropogenic methane emissions come mostly from energy, waste and agriculture. Around 25%290 come from the Oil & Gas industry. TotalEnergies believes that it is the industry’s responsibility to aim for zero methane emissions by 2030 and wants to set an example for the industry. Our plan is based on three actions: eliminating routine flaring, eliminating vents and repairing leaks as soon as they are detected.

Continuous excellence in our operations

TotalEnergies has already reduced its operated methane emissions by more than 60% since 2015, date of the Paris Agreement, even though the Oil & Gas industry as a whole has maintained an almost constant level of emissions over this period, according to IEA estimates. In early 2022, TotalEnergies set very ambitious, specific targets for the decade ahead that call for a 50% reduction from 2020 levels by 2025 and 80% by 2030291. These targets cover all of the Company’s operated assets and go beyond the 75% reduction in methane emissions from Oil & Gas by 2030 (vs 2020) as recommended by the IEA when creating the NZE scenario. TotalEnergies is making rapid progress towards this objective: in 2023, our operated methane emissions were 34 kt, down 47% vs 2020. TotalEnergies now aims to reach its 2025 target of -50%, one year ahead of schedule, in 2024.

TotalEnergies is a signatory of the Oil & Gas Decarbonization Charter launched at COP28, which includes the ambition "Aiming for near-zero Upstream methane emissions by 2030". In line with this collective ambition, TotalEnergies is strengthening its methane intensity292 target of less than 0.1% by 2030 on its gas facilities, by extending it to all its operated Upstream Oil and Gas facilities.

At the same time, TotalEnergies is fully assuming its leadership role in the fight to collectively reduce methane emissions.

Our drone-based methane detection and quantification technology made available to several national oil companies

TotalEnergies works alongside its partners to implement best practices on its non-operated assets.

The Company is a pioneer in the detection and quantification of emissions in real-life conditions. After deploying its AUSEA (Airborn Ultralight Spectrometer for Environmental Application) drones at all its upstream operated sites worldwide, TotalEnergies has performed in 2023 the first AUSEA flights on non-operated assets during four campaigns in: Qatar, Brazil, Azerbaijan and the United Arab Emirates.

TotalEnergies has also announced in recent months the signing of five cooperation agreements with national oil companies to make its AUSEA methane emissions detection and quantification technology available: Petrobras in Brazil, SOCAR in Azerbaijan, Sonangol in Angola, NNPC293 in Nigeria and ONGC294 in India.

Highlights

●OGMP 2.0 Gold standard

In its “An Eye on Methane” report for 2023, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)295 confirmed TotalEnergies’ Gold Standard status for the 3rd year in a row, and rated our strategy for engaging partners in our non-operated assets as "all-stars"296. Each year, this report reviews the deployment by Oil & Gas companies of the Oil & Gas Methane Partnership’s OGMP 2.0 framework, which was created in 2020 to guide reporting on methane in the Oil & Gas industry. The framework encourages companies to continue improving their reporting of operated and non-operated emissions and focuses on performing on-site measurements to verify that estimates are exhaustive and accurate.

●Support for the World Bank's new methane trust fund

TotalEnergies was the first company to announce a contribution of $25 million over the period 2024-2030 to the Global Flaring and Methane Reduction (GFMR) trust fund launched by the World Bank at COP28. The GFMR will target, finance and support strategic projects to eliminate routine flaring and reduce methane emissions in countries with the greatest emissions reduction potential.

c.Expanding geological carbon storage to reduce our emissions and those of our customers

The IEA's NZE scenario297 includes the use of CCS298 up to of 6 Gt CO2 per year in 2050, to reduce part of the emissions from residual Oil & Gas consumption, as well as those from industrial processes (cement, lime, steel, etc.). This capacity is more than 100 times greater than the 45 Mt CO2 per year currently captured worldwide.

Our CCS strategy gives priority to decarbonizing our activities in order to reduce Scope 1+2 emissions from our Upstream Oil & Gas assets, refining and LNG plants. For example, at the Snøhvit liquefaction plant, where we are a partner alongside Equinor, around 8 Mt of native CO2 have been stored since 2008. Similarly, the native CO2 separated in the new NFE and NFS LNG liquefaction trains currently under development will be stored by QatarEnergy. The same will be true for the native CO2 separated on Cameron LNG to be stored in the Hackberry CCS storage facility in the context of a new train project by Cameron LNG. Finally, for our Ichthys LNG asset in Australia, we are studying a native CO2 storage solution for start-up before 2030.The study of CCS solutions on our assets therefore complements the efforts already mentioned to reduce emissions (electrification, energy efficiency, flaring reduction, etc.).

The Company also invests in CO2 storage projects for third parties ("Storage as a Service"), offering CO2 storage solutions to large industrial customers who can thus reduce their Scope 1 emissions and secure the future of their activities. By 2023, we have already invested around $100 million in this business. We will continue to invest heavily in storage projects, both for our own assets and for third parties, to achieve our objective of developing more than 10 Mt CO2 of storage capacity by 2030.

Europe is at the heart of this CCS strategy. Our Company is one of the incumbent operators in the North Sea and has recognized operational and geological expertise in the area. The United Kingdom, Norway and Europe have set themselves objectives, regulations and provided significant financial support to promote the cross-border deployment of CCUS299. We are currently developing five projects in the North Sea that will provide decarbonization solutions for our assets and those of our customers. Our ambition is to continue to acquire new exploration permits to increase our CO2 storage capacity after 2030.

We are also investigating the use of carbon in various forms (CCU300).

Carbon storage projects in Europe
Only in 2030 will TotalEnergies begin voluntary offsetting of its residual emissions via NBS (Nature Based Solutions) carbon credits, and will offset only Company’s Scope 1+2 residual emissions.

We are working to build a high-quality portfolio and are paying close attention to the integrity and permanence of the emissions reductions and sequestration achieved by the activities financed in this way.

We are in favor of strengthening a global framework of trust to further reinforce robust and recognized voluntary crediting mechanisms.

We are investing in forestry, regenerative agriculture and wetlands protection projects. Our strategy aims to combine and balance the value of people’s financial revenue from agriculture and forestry and the value of the benefits to soil, biodiversity, the water cycle and the production of carbon credits. When that approach is successful, the local standard of living improves and degradation of the land diminishes – as do emissions. This search for balance among different practices makes a just transition possible.

At 2023 year end, our stock of credits stood at just under 11 million out of which the very large majority is certified by VERRA VCS standard (> 99%; the remaining < 1% being certified by the Australian Carbon Credit Units Scheme of the Australian Government). We have allocated $100 million annually for these projects, and the cumulative budget pledged for all of these campaigns amounts to nearly $725 million over their cumulated lifespan, with the accumulated credits expected to total 44 million in 2030 and 71 million in 2050.

The final tally of credits obtained will be determined once the projects have been completed. If such a stock of 44 million credits is built up in 2030 and on the basis of a consumption of 10% of the stock per year from 2030, then TotalEnergies would use around 5 million credits per year from 2030 onwards.

Highlight: Invest in a fund

In 2023, the Company has made the decision to invest $100 million over 15 years in the projects of the Nature Based Carbon fund managed  by Climate Asset Management, which focuses on preserving or restoring three types of ecosystems: degraded natural forests, grasslands impacted by human activity and wetlands.
Our Scope 1+2 emissions based on equity share amounted to 49 Mt CO2e in 2023. Half of those emissions are attributable to our interests in sites we operate; the remaining being from our interests in sites operated by our partners. We are actively mobilizing our partners to reduce emissions from assets they operate.

At Exploration & Production, a dedicated team is tasked with sharing best practices with our partners at non-operated assets, such as deploying a decarbonization roadmap that includes an energy assessment, reduction of methane venting and routine flaring, and improving energy efficiency, particularly for gas turbines and compressors. We use the projects conducted at our operated sites to illustrate ways our partners can reduce their Scope 1+2 emissions and encourage uptake.

Upstream emissions can also be reduced by reinjecting the CO2 extracted with the gas produced. This reinjected volume currently represents almost 2 Mt per year, in Company's equity share, particularly in Brazil, and is set to grow significantly as associated gas production increases.
At COP28, a major initiative between national and international oil companies was launched to reduce the industry’s GHG emissions: the Oil & Gas Decarbonization Charter (OGDC). This initiative brings together more than 50 companies, two-thirds of which we are partner with, representing over 40% of the world’s oil production. This is an historic step forward, as it brings together for the first time international oil companies (IOCs) & national oil companies (NOCs) from this sector around concrete objectives not only to act on their emissions (net-zero operations by 2050 or earlier, elimination of routine flaring by 2030 and aiming for near zero Upstream methane by 2030) but also to report on their actions. TotalEnergies was one of the first companies to sign the Charter, and its CEO Patrick Pouyanné was chosen to represent the IOCs on the OGDC’s three-person co-chairmanship, formed by the CEOs of ADNOC, Aramco and TotalEnergies.
We are ambitious in our targets for direct emissions (Scope 1+2), which are controlled in our operated facilities. We have defined medium and long-term targets and action plans aimed at Net Zero by 2050.

We are also ambitious in helping our customers reduce their emissions - through our multi-energy strategy, which makes a wider range of energies available to our customers, including low-carbon energies. We track progress through the decarbonization index of our sales (life cycle carbon intensity301 of energy products sold). We have been leading among our peers in terms of actually achieving decarbonization of our energy products sales mix since 2015.

As part of its contribution to the energy transition of its clients, we are thus developing activities in the production and sales of low-carbon electricity. We also produce and sell liquified natural gas, which is a necessary transition fuel for building a reliable, low-carbon power system, complementing renewable energies that are intermittent by nature. Moreover, gas helps to decarbonize power generation in many countries, since burning gas rather than coal to produce electricity emits half as much CO2 for the same amount of energy produced (refer to point 5.4.2.2-B-2-i).

In this respect, setting objectives to drastically reduce TotalEnergies’s global indirect emissions (Scope 3)302 in absolute value, without an evolution of the overall structure of energy demand, is in reality not relevant to reduce global GHG emissions.

Most of the emissions reported under Scope 3 by TotalEnergies correspond to the direct emissions (Scope 1) of the consumers of these products: the use of these products depends on their decisions and needs.

In this context, an absolute reduction target for Scope 3 for a company like TotalEnergies, without any change in energy systems and therefore without the reduction of the corresponding Scope 1 of energy users, would lead to a shift of this demand towards other suppliers, notably the national oil companies of producing countries which account for more than 70% of the world market (compared with around 1.5% for TotalEnergies).

This strategy would have no effect on lowering global greenhouse gas emissions, and therefore no positive impact on climate, and would be contrary to the interests of our Company and its shareholders.

This strategy could be counter-productive for TotalEnergies' customers, as the Company has set as a goal to ensure their energy supply security while supporting them in their own decarbonization journey.

Reminder: under Scope 3, since 2016 TotalEnergies has reported Category 11 emissions related to the end use by its customers of products sold, i.e. linked to their combustion to obtain energy. Since 2023, TotalEnergies has published an estimate of indirect emissions related to the other Scope 3 categories, in accordance with the classification used by the GHG Protocol and Ipieca. We are also implementing action plans to reduce the emissions of the other categories.
By 2030, the Company’s two-pillars balanced transition strategy aims to result in a sales mix of energy products with the view to final use whose lifecycle carbon intensity303 of energy products sold would be reduced by 25%, which means:

–for an equivalent quantity of energy, the carbon content of energy products would be reduced by 25% (“less emissions for same energy”)

–for an equivalent quantity of emissions (Scope 1+2+3), the Company would supply 33% more energy to its customers (“more energy for same emissions”).

Furthermore, by 2030, energy products sold such as LNG and low-carbon electricity might contribute to enabled emissions reductions 304 of around 150 Mt CO2e (around 100 Mt CO2e coming from Gas & LNG sales and around 50 Mt CO2e coming from Renewables). These reductions, which will result from our customers decisions to substitute more carbon-intensive energy products with less carbon-intensive ones, and therefore reduce their own Scope 1+2 (use of gas or renewables to generate electricity instead of fossil fuels), will definitely contribute to lower global GHG emissions.
A significant part of TotalEnergies’ Downstream refining and marketing activities are located in Europe.

The European Union with its Green Deal and its "Fit for 55" regulatory package, has the ambition to be the first carbon-neutral continent by 2050.

These major trends are leading us to accelerate the transition of our Downstream activities in Europe to reduce our exposure to petroleum products and to develop in new mobilities. Thus, at a global level, we expect to reduce our sales of petroleum products by 40% by 2030, so that we do not sell or refine more fuel than our oil production. This means, in particular, that our service-station networks have to adapt to lower demand for fuels, notably through disposals in Europe. 

Conversely, this strategy is leading us to develop actively in new mobilities: in low-carbon molecules, we have initiated the conversion of its refineries into biorefineries in Europe; in electric mobility, the Company is accelerating our growth with a plan to deploy charging points on major corridors and motorways and in large cities in Europe. In hydrogen, we are notably developing a European network of hydrogen stations for trucks, in partnership with Air Liquide. 
Gas-fired power plants are a flexible resource for power generation and can be mobilized quickly; as a result, they offer a secure backup for grids designed to be powered increasingly by intermittent renewable sources. CCGTs discharge half the greenhouse gases of the coal or fuel oil-powered plants305 that still, in some countries, account for the majority of power generation capacity. The use of coal accounts for 36% of power generation and 74% of GHG emissions associated with electricity, while natural gas accounts for 23% of generation and 22% of emissions306.

LNG, which can be shipped by sea, can flexibly supply many gas-fired power plants. A large percentage of the natural gas we sell goes to the electricity industry.

Given the positive role played by natural gas, TotalEnergies is aiming to increase its share of the sales mix by 2030, and has made the decision not to set a gas Scope 3307 reduction target. When fuel-oil or coal-fired power generation is replaced by gas-fired power generation, GHG emissions fall, whereas TotalEnergies’ gas Scope 3308 increases.

We have estimated the reductions of emissions enabled to which our 2023 sales of LNG may have contributed. To do that, we identified the likely competing source of flexible power generation for each LNG-receiving country. The calculation is based on generation mix and emission factors issued by Enerdata and IEA309, for each country310 and generation mean.

We estimate that our customers’ use of LNG has enabled emissions reduction by about 70 Mt CO2e in 2023.

Estimated enabled emissions reductions by renewable electricity sales by 2030

Similar approach as the one described above-mentioned has been taken to estimate enabled emissions reductions for our sales of renewable electricity: the methodology compares emissions from the country’s alternative non-renewable mix (following the methodology applied by IRENA) and the ones from solar and wind generation. The applied emission factors (published by IEA) cover the entire life cycle of power generation311. Non-renewable production mixes are based on IEA312 projections by country313 or, if unavailable, by region314. Thus, by 2030, the emissions reductions enabled by a portfolio of 100 GW of gross capacity have been estimated at around 50 Mt CO2e.Electricity demand, which is vital to the success of the energy transition, is expected to grow sharply, as decarbonization is at the heart of the roadmaps of countries committed to carbon neutrality by 2050.

In response, Integrated Power, a new pillar of the Company's strategy, is developing an integrated model encompassing the entire value chain, from power generation to sales and trading activities, with a profitability target of ~12% ROACE315.

TotalEnergies net electricity production target is to produce more than 100 TWh by 2030, thanks to a 4 to 5-fold increase in renewable production (19 TWh in 2023) and a 2-fold increase in flexible assets production (15 TWh in 2023). As part of its ambition to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, TotalEnergies is building a competitive portfolio of renewable (solar, onshore and offshore wind) and flexible (CCGT, storage) assets to provide its customers with less and less carbon-intensive electricity available 24/7.

The Company's levers to grow with a return on average capital employed of ~12% are selectivity in its choices of projects; integration across the entire electricity value chain; cost control using our project management and offshore development skills; mobilizing external financing at competitive rates and making partial divestments to accelerate cash flow generation and diversify our portfolio’s exposure.

Development of a differentiated profitable integrated model
Electricity generation - Company share (TWh)


b.Our renewable electricity capacity build-up

We are executing our roadmap in renewable electricity.

At year-end 2023, TotalEnergies reached a gross installed production capacity of 22 GW of renewable electricity and intends to continue developing these activities to reach 35 GW by 2025 and 100 GW by 2030, a level that would bring us among the world's top five producers of renewable electricity (wind and solar) excluding China.

TotalEnergies plans to invest more than $1 billion in electric mobility between 2024 and 2028, developing a network of high-power electric charging stations along motorways, major roads and in urban hubs in Europe.

By 2028, the Company's ambition is to have 1,000 high power charging sites in Europe.

In addition to this network adapted to road roaming, TotalEnergies supports its B2B customers in their transition to electric mobility by offering services for the deployment and supervision of charging stations at the workplace, as well as at employees' homes. For heavy duty trucks in particular, the Company is developing a tailor-made offer for road haulers, with smart charging and green electricity supply solutions in addition to in-depot charging. To meet their charging needs outside their depots, TotalEnergies plans to install high power charging points suited to this type of vehicles along European corridor from 2024 onwards.

The Company is also developing its recharging network in a number of cities around the world, with a portfolio of over 30,000 charging points in operation or under deployment in Paris, London, Brussels and Singapore. 

Finally, TotalEnergies supports its individual customers at home, with home charging solutions that include an energy supply contract or on the road with subscription offers allowing access to a very large network of charging stations.

From the production of renewable electricity to the operation of charging services, the Company is present across the entire electric mobility value chain.
 Today, biofuels emit 50% less CO2 than their fossil fuel equivalents316, making them a decarbonization pathway for liquid fuels. Because demand is strong, this is a high-margin market, but access to feedstocks (plants, residues, sugar, etc.) remains a barrier to growth. Among these biofuels, TotalEnergies favors the production of Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) to decarbonize the aviation industry. To avoid land use conflicts, TotalEnergies is developing solutions based on primarily food industry waste and residues (used oils, animal fats). Our aim is to increase the share of circular feedstocks to more than 75% as from 2024 in its production of biofuels.

Biogas

Biogas, produced from the decomposition of organic waste, is a renewable gas. Injected into gas networks in the form of biomethane, it contributes to the decarbonization of natural gas uses.

TotalEnergies' gross production capacity of 1.1 TWh/year eq. biomethane has almost doubled compared with 2022. The Company now intends to pursue its development through growth, mainly in Europe and the United States, with a 2030 target of 10 TWh of net production.

Hydrogen and e-fuels

Hydrogen

The production of green hydrogen will require the massive deployment of renewable electricity production capacities, to which TotalEnergies is contributing through its investments and the development of the Integrated Power segment. For our operations, our priority is to decarbonize the hydrogen consumed in our European refineries by 2030. TotalEnergies aims to replace carbon based or grey hydrogen by green hydrogen, produced by electrolysis of water using electricity from renewable energy sources.

Synthetic fuels, e-fuels

CO2 can be combined, in reaction with renewable hydrogen, to produce synthetic fuels or gas. In 2023, TotalEnergies is setting milestones in its synthetic fuels roadmap.

b.Focus Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF)

TotalEnergies intends to become a major player in the production of SAF (Sustainable Aviation Fuel), with a target of 1.5 Mt/year by 2030.

This production is currently being developed on our existing platforms in Europe, the Middle East and Asia, notably Grandpuits, Normandie, La Mède and SATORP.

●Grandpuits: The biorefinery is scheduled to come on stream in 2025. It plans to process 420 kt/year of feedstock, mainly waste and residues, to produce up to 285 kt/year of SAF by 2028. In 2022, TotalEnergies has joined forces with SARIA (European leader in the collection and valorization of organic materials into sustainable products) to guarantee the supply of lipidic feedstock.

●Normandy: TotalEnergies plans to increase SAF production from 130 kt/year in 2025 to 160 kt/year by 2027.

●La Mède: Since 2022, biodiesel produced at La Mède has already been used to produce SAF at the TotalEnergies plant in Oudalle, near Le Havre. In 2024, TotalEnergies plans to continue to invest in the site, so as to be able to process up to 100% waste from the circular economy (used oils and animal fats) and will produce locally 14 kt/year of SAF by 2025.

●SATORP: For the first time in the Middle East, SATORP has succeeded in co-processing used cooking oil to produce a fuel that meets all the quality criteria of the SAF ISCC+ certified specifications.

●Partnerships

•In Japan, TotalEnergies has partnered with ENEOS Corporation to study the feasibility of a SAF production unit at the ENEOS refinery in Wakayama. The planned unit, which would have a production capacity of 335 kt/year of SAF, would process waste or residues from the circular economy.

•In China, TotalEnergies is studying with its partner Sinopec the development of SAF production of around 230kt/year. This unit would mainly process local residues and waste.

Beyond the SAF currently produced from used cooking oil, our mission is to prepare the next generation of aviation fuels, such as e-SAF.

Together with Masdar, the UAE Civil Aviation Authority, Airbus, Falcon Aviation Services and Axens, TotalEnergies has demonstrated the potential for converting methanol into SAF. Based on the use of renewable electricity, it could enable the production of e-SAF from CO2 converted into methanol.c.Innovating to accelerate the energy transition 

Each year, TotalEnergies devotes around $1 billion317 to R&D and innovation and mobilizes more than 3,500 employees.

R&D at TotalEnergies 

In 2023, 65% of our R&D focused on new energies (renewable electricity, low-carbon molecules), batteries and reducing our environmental footprint (methane, CCUS, water, biodiversity, etc.). This evolution of our research and innovation towards new low-carbon energy points to the Company’s future.

One of the missions of our new OneTech branch, created in 2021 to meet the Company’s new challenges and mobilize the teams, is to provide solutions for reducing CO2  emissions and improving the energy efficiency of our projects from the design phase, as well as to accelerate innovation in all our assets. To that end, OneTech mobilizes integrated teams working on the design, construction and operation of our energy facilities, right including R&D, reinforced by the development, testing and deployment of innovative external solutions for our assets to cope with identified issues in our operations.

Leveraging digital technology to reduce our emissions

TotalEnergies' Digital Factory brings together around 300 developers, data scientists and other digital specialists with the objective to develop digital solutions to optimize our industrial assets (environmental impact, availability, costs) or to offer new services to our customers.
C.Advocacy and sector initiatives in support of the energy transition

A successful energy transition requires closer collaboration between all the players involved.

Support for government action and climate sectorial initiatives and disclosures

TotalEnergies supports the pledges made by nations worldwide to combat global warming as part of the Paris Agreement and publishes its positions on its corporate website (heading sustainability/stakeholder-relationships-advocacy/advocacy-principles).

At COP28, we supported the goal of tripling renewable energy capacity and doubling energy efficiency measures by 2030. We also joined the Oil and Gas Decarbonization Charter (OGDC).

In Europe, TotalEnergies supports the “Fit-for-55” package and specifically some of its key components, such as the broader use of carbon pricing, the largescale expansion of renewable energies, deployment of infrastructure and the development of fuels and renewables for the transportation industry. Our responses to the European Commission’s public consultations on climate are public and may be viewed online.

In France, TotalEnergies, along with 60 other major companies, signed the Entreprises Pour l'Environnement (EpE) association's statement calling for an acceleration of the ecological transition, ahead of COP28.

For further details on the collective initiatives supported by TotalEnergies, refer to point 1.4 of Chapter 1.

Review of Affiliations

TotalEnergies has published a list of its industry affiliations on its website since 2016.

The Company typically cooperates with these organizations on technical subjects, but some take public stances on other issues, such as climate. Since 2019, TotalEnergies has conducted a biannual assessment of the public positions on climate and other issues of the main industry organizations of which it is a member. The Company examines whether those positions are aligned with its own, based on the six principles from its Advocacy Directive. A new review was carried out in 2023.

In 2023, most of new associations in the energy field joined by our entities is related to renewable energies and low-carbon technologies.

Review of affiliations - 6 key principles

Scientific position

TotalEnergies recognizes the link established by science between human activities, in particular the use of fossil fuels, and climate change.

The Paris Agreement

TotalEnergies recognizes the Paris Agreement as a major step forward in the fight against global warming and supports the initiatives of the implementing States to fulfill its aims.

Carbon pricing

TotalEnergies supports the implementation of carbon pricing.

The development of renewable energies

TotalEnergies supports policies, initiatives and technologies aimed at promoting the development of renewable energies and sustainable bioenergies (biofuels, biogas) as well as energies and technologies aimed at decarbonizing industrial processes transportation, such as hydrogen, carbon capture and electric vehicles.TotalEnergies promotes the role of natural gas as a transition fuel, in particular as a replacement for coal. TotalEnergies supports policies aimed at measuring and reducing methane emissions, aiming for zero methane emissions. TotalEnergies promotes a policy of reducing greenhouse gas emissions: avoid; reduce by using the best available technologies; offset the minimized residual emissions.

Carbon offsetting

TotalEnergies supports the carbon offset mechanisms necessary to achieve carbon neutrality, through organized and certified markets ensuring the quality and sustainability of carbon credits.
TotalEnergies has strengthened the resilience of its portfolio through very active portfolio management in recent years: the Upstream portfolio has seen a 50% portfolio change since 2015, ensuring an oil reserves replacement ratio above 100% over 2015-2023.

Our portfolio has a low breakeven point, in line with the Company’s objective of keeping it below $30/b (the Company's organic cash breakeven point before dividends is $22.2/b in 2023), which ensures the competitiveness of its resources. For its Upstream Oil & Gas activities in 2023, TotalEnergies has the lowest production cost per barrel of around $5.5/boe among its peers318 and its GHG emissions intensity (Scope 1+2) is falling to 18 kg CO2e/boe in 2023 (compared with 19 in 2022)319.

The average life of the Company’s proved and probable Oil & Gas reserves is 18 years, and the discounted value of its upstream Oil & Gas assets over 20 years old represents less than 15% of their total value.

Risks of stranded assets 

In June 2020, TotalEnergies determined that among its Upstream assets, only the Fort Hills and Surmont oil sands projects in Canada could be classified as stranded assets, meaning assets with reserves beyond 20 years and high production costs, whose overall reserves might therefore not be produced by 2050. TotalEnergies has sold these assets in 2023. This portfolio management approach allows TotalEnergies to mitigate the risk of stranded assets in the future if the risks of a structural decline in demand for Oil & Gas materialize faster than estimated as a result of stricter global environmental regulations and constraints and the resulting changes in consumer preferences.

As shown in the cost merit order curve of production costs for 2040, compared to the demand expected under various IEA scenarios, TotalEnergies' portfolio of Upstream Oil & Gas projects has an average technical cost that places it among the 50 Mb/d lowest-cost for these horizons, thanks in particular to long plateau oil assets with low production costs.

Merit curve of global oil production costs320

Technical cost ($/b)

image

Sensitivity to CO2, Oil & Gas prices

TotalEnergies assesses the robustness of its portfolio, including new material investments, based on relevant scenarios and sensitivity tests.

Each material investment, including in the exploration, acquisition or development of Oil & Gas resources, as well as in other energies and technologies, is reviewed in relation to the objectives set out in the Paris Agreement, so that every new investment enhances the resilience of the Company’s portfolio.

Even though CO2 pricing does not currently apply in all the countries where the Company operates, TotalEnergies includes, as a base case, a minimum CO2 price of $100/ton in its investment criteria (or the prevailing price in a given country, if higher); beyond 2029, the CO2 price is increased by 2%/year.

–Assuming a CO2 price of $200/ton from 2024 and an annual increase of 2% beyond 2029, i.e. an increase of $100/ton compared to the base case scenario from that date onwards, TotalEnergies estimates a negative impact of around 15% on the discounted present value of all its assets (Upstream and Downstream).

–Compared with the reference scenario used to evaluate investments (Brent at $50/b), the use of the IEA's321 NZE price scenario would lead to a present value of all the Company's assets (Upstream and Downstream) that is around 10% lower.
In addition, to ensure robust accounting of its assets in the balance sheet, the Company calculates the impairment of its Upstream assets on the basis of an oil price trajectory that stabilises until 2030, then decreases linearly to reach 50 $2023/b in 2040, and then decreases from 2040 onwards to the price adopted in 2050 by the IEA's NZE scenario, i.e. 25.5 $2023/b. Gas prices in Europe and Asia decline and stabilize from 2027 until 2040 at levels lower than current prices, with the Henry Hub remaining at $3 $2023/MMBtu over this period. They then all converge towards the prices in the IEA's NZE scenario in 2050.

Unconventional Oil & Gas

Unconventional Oil & Gas are defined by the EIA322 as hydrocarbons that are “produced by means that do not meet the criteria for conventional production” ie “by a well drilled into a geologic formation in which the reservoir and fluid characteristics permit the oil and natural gas to readily flow to the wellbore.” According to UNFC323, "examples include CBM, low permeability deposits such as tight gas (including shale gas) and tight oil (including shale oil), gas hydrates and natural bitumen".

In 2023, these non-conventional hydrocarbons accounted for 9.7% of our production and less than 5% of our consolidated turnover. In addition, TotalEnergies no longer produces oil from tar sands since the divestment of its Surmont and Fort Hills Canadian assets at the end of 2023. The Company also exited its extra-heavy oil development projects in Venezuela's Orinoco Belt in 2021.

Ultra-deep offshore, defined as water depths in excess of 1,500 m, which in the 2000s represented the technical limit for drilling and production facilities (since then largely exceeded), does not fall into the category of non-conventional hydrocarbons: in fact, reservoirs located in these areas are developed using facilities that employ a continuum of conventional technologies. It is the combination of very high-pressure reservoirs and very deep-water depths that can present increased risks. TotalEnergies does not intend to develop this type of asset.

Similarly, the mere fact that an oil or a gas field is located in an Arctic zone is not sufficient to qualify it as unconventional, if it is operated using conventional technologies. However, the Company recognizes the particular environmental sensitivity of certain Arctic zones. For this reason, in 2012 we undertook not to explore any oil fields in Arctic sea ice; a list of our licenses in Arctic zones is available on the Company's website. 
Operational risks related to the effects of climate change and extreme events are among the risks analyzed by the TotalEnergies Risk Management Committee. This committee relies on risk-mapping work. In addition, the Risk Committee (Corisk) assesses investment projects, risks and corresponding climate-related issues before they are presented to the Executive Committee.

Continuing to invest with discipline

In a global economic context marked by inflation, it is essential to maintain the Company’s investment criteria to ensure the profitability and resilience of its portfolio. Each material investment project is assessed taking into consideration the aims of the Paris Agreement and on the basis of the following criteria: 

–project profitability is analyzed in a hydrocarbon price scenario compatible with the Paris Agreement objectives of limiting temperature rise to "well below 2°C" and with a carbon price of $100 per ton (or the prevailing price if higher in a given country);

–for new Oil & Gas projects (greenfield projects and acquisitions), the intensity of Scope 1+2 greenhouse gas emissions is compared, depending on their nature, to the intensity of the average greenhouse gas emissions of Upstream production assets or that of various Downstream units (LNG plants, refineries) of the Company.

As of 2024, the threshold has been lowered to 18 kg CO2e/boe, versus 19 kg CO2e/boe previously – evidence of the effectiveness of these criteria. For additional investments in existing assets (brownfield projects), the investment will have to lower the Scope 1+2 emissions intensity of the asset in question. The goal is for each new investment to contribute to lowering the average intensity of the Company’s Scope 1+2 greenhouse gas emissions in its category.

–for projects involving other energy and technologies (biofuels, biogas...), GHG emission reductions are assessed based on the amount by which they will reduce the carbon content of our sales.

In 2023, after evaluation according to these criteria, 43 investments have been validated. The most significant by category are:

●Upstream Oil & Gas Division

Development of Phase 1 of the AGUP project in Iraq, as part of the GGIP project, launch of the Mabruk restart project in Libya, extension of the Dalia and Kaombo fields in Angola.

●Liquefied natural gas

In June 2023, TotalEnergies signed a framework agreement with U.S.-based NextDecade to participate in the development of the Rio Grande LNG (RGLNG) project, a liquefaction plant, whose construction has started in July 2023 in southern Texas.

●Integrated Power

Various renewable electricity projects (PV, wind, hydro and BESS) resulting from the acquisition of stakes in Casa Dos Ventos (Brazil) and Ronensans Enerji (Turkey) and TotalEren; 3GW marine concession in Germany and 2.7GW in the USA (New York and New Jersey), BESS installations in Feluy & Antwerp (Belgium) and CottonWood (USA), PV power plants in Clinton (OH), Brazoria (TX), and Guillena in Spain.

●Low-carbon molecules

Hydrogen: acquisition contracts for the needs of the Normandy platform and the Leuna refinery; Biogas: final investment decision taken for the BioNorrois unit (153 GWh/year); SAF: doubling to 285 kt of production capacity at Grandpuits, France (Galaxie extension).

●CCS

Permit application in Norway for the Luna project.

●Disposals

In Canada, TotalEnergies no longer holds any oil sands interests as of November 2023 following (i) the sale to ConocoPhillips of its 50% interest in Surmont, as well as (ii) the sale to Suncor of all of the shares of its subsidiary TotalEnergies EP Canada, including its interest in the Fort Hills oil sands asset.

In Germany and the Netherlands, sale to Couche-Tard of all 1,580 TotalEnergies service stations. In Belgium and Luxembourg, set up of a joint venture (TotalEnergies 40% and Couche-Tard 60%) to operate more than 600 service stations in these countries.
The risks posed by climate change are included among the risks analyzed by the TotalEnergies Risk Management Committee (TRMC). TotalEnergies ranks its risks by type and gravity.

In 2022, the TRMC updated its risk mapping and submitted the results to the Board of Directors in early 2023. In the table below, TotalEnergies' risks are positioned in relation to identified generic risks, in accordance with the recommendation of the Taskforce on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TCFD). The TRMC also verifies the use of appropriate risk management systems. Additional action plans can be defined when necessary.

Audits are conducted to ensure that existing risk reduction and control measures are effective. Personnel from multiple disciplines, segments and businesses may collaborate in carrying out these action plans and audits. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors monitors the effectiveness of the internal control and risk management systems established by senior management, in light of identified risks and with a view to fulfilling TotalEnergies’ objectives.

Adaptation to physical risks

The Company takes climate risk into account in the design of its facilities and in the evaluation of its sites in operation. Climate change potentially has multiple consequences, including rising sea levels and increased extreme weather events, that can negatively impact its operations.

TotalEnergies has issued recommendations for addressing the anticipated changes in the climate system and its components in its facility design bases (metocean criteria). Similarly, TotalEnergies evaluates the vulnerability of its sites in operation to weather events so that their consequences do not affect the installations’ integrity or people’s safety. Internal studies have not identified any existing facilities that are vulnerable to the consequences of climate change known to date.
