Low-Carbon Innovation

For Valero, investments in low-carbon fuels that began in 2009 have
Today, Valero is the world’s largest
provided an advantage for the company to capture market opportunities.
producer of liquid low-carbon
As of December 31, 2023, we have invested more than $5.4 billion in our
transportation fuels.
low-carbon businesses, and we expect additional growth opportunities
in this area. These investments, which have been held to the same minimum after-tax IRR hurdle rate as our refining
growth projects, have created value for our stockholders and lowered GHG emissions in the transportation sector.
The following are examples of high-return, low-carbon projects that we are producing, developing and/or evaluating:

Renewable Diesel, Renewable Naphtha and Renewable Propane
A drop-in fuel interchangeable with petroleum diesel,
our renewable diesel is manufactured primarily from
waste feedstocks, including used cooking oil, recycled
animal fats and inedible corn oil, as well as other
feedstocks such as soybean oil. These feedstocks
are pretreated and purified prior to conversion
into renewable diesel and niche grades, such as
renewable arctic diesel.

Renewable diesel reduces life cycle
GHG emissions by up to 80%, compared
with traditional diesel. 2
Valero is the world’s second-largest renewable diesel
producer and currently operates two renewable
diesel plants located in St. Charles Parish, Louisiana,
and Port Arthur, Texas, with a total annual production
capacity of 1.2 billion gallons of renewable diesel and
50 million gallons of renewable naphtha.
Renewable naphtha and renewable propane are
produced in the process and recovered as coproducts. With an annual production capacity of 50
million gallons, renewable naphtha can be used as a
gasoline blendstock or a feedstock for producing lowcarbon petrochemicals.

Renewable propane, similarly, has multiple end
uses, including as a low-carbon fuel, a renewable
petrochemical feedstock or a feedstock in the production
of low-carbon hydrogen. Currently, renewable propane
from our renewable diesel plants is co-processed in
the hydrogen plants at two of our refineries to generate
low-carbon hydrogen. The low-carbon hydrogen is rerouted into the production process further decreasing
the carbon intensity (CI) of renewable diesel, renewable
propane and renewable naphtha.
We are also co-processing renewable natural gas from
municipal solid waste in the hydrogen plant at one of
our refineries. The low-carbon hydrogen is used in the
production of lower carbon transportation fuels for export
to Europe. This fuel has a higher market value compared
with petroleum fuels, and certain governments in Europe
use it to help meet GHG emissions reduction targets
or goals. In 2023, we processed nearly 2 trillion BTUs
of renewable natural gas, which doubled the amount
processed in 2022.

Since 2013, Valero has grown to become
the world's second-largest producer of
renewable diesel.

Ethanol
Ethanol is a low-carbon, high-octane fuel. When used as a gasoline
blendstock, ethanol boosts the octane rating of the finished fuel.

Ethanol offers at least 30% lower life
cycle GHG emissions, compared
with petroleum gasoline. 2

Valero operates 12 ethanol plants located in the U.S. Midwest, with
a combined production capacity of 1.6 billion gallons per year. The
plants are dry mill facilities that process corn to produce ethanol and co-products, such as dry distillers grains
(DDGs) and syrup for livestock feed, and inedible corn oil. DDGs and syrup are sources of supplemental energy and
protein for livestock and poultry.

10

Low-Carbon

Sustainable Aviation Fuel or SAF
Made with feedstocks used in the renewable diesel process, synthetic paraffinic
kerosene (SPK) or neat SAF is a non-petroleum-based fuel. Blending SPK and
traditional jet fuel results in SAF, and current aviation regulations allow SPK to be
blended up to 50% with jet fuel for use in an aircraft. Valero has announced a
large-scale SAF project at its renewable diesel plant in Texas, which is expected
to be completed in the fourth quarter of 2024. The SAF project is intended to
provide optionality to upgrade approximately 50% of the plant's annual 470
million-gallon renewable diesel production capacity to SPK. See global SAF
mandates to decrease GHG emissions in the aviation sector on page 15.

The commonly used term,
SAF, includes a wide range
of neat SAF blended with
jet fuel. Based on ASTM,
the industry standard
specification, the
maximum blending limit
for neat SAF is 50%.13

An alternative pathway for producing SAF is the alcohol-to-jet (ATJ) process. With abundant supply of ethanol,
Valero’s participation in carbon sequestration projects may provide a competitive advantage for ATJ production,
as the CI of ethanol is expected to decrease by more than 40% with carbon sequestration.

Benefits of Renewable Arctic Diesel10 11 12 - The cold truth is that winter
temperatures greatly affect the charging and range of electric
vehicle (EV) batteries. Unlike EVs, renewable arctic diesel is designed
to withstand freezing temperatures in arctic climates and maintain
its performance.
EVs in Cold Temperatures

Renewable Arctic Diesel
(Arctic RD)

The lower the temperature, the
longer it can take to charge EV
batteries.

Arctic RD is a drop-in fuel,
just like renewable diesel,
made to withstand freezing
temperatures.

Cold can decrease battery
power, making it challenging
to fulfill optimal charge range
and accessories, such as cabin
heating, seat heating or defrosting
functions.

Vehicles powered with Arctic RD
can use all accessories, just like
in any other liquid fuel-powered
vehicle.

EV driving range can start to
deplete at 40°F, an unexpected
concern if you are not in proximity
to chargers.

Emergency vehicles running
on Arctic RD are reliable and
dependable.

In cold temperatures, EVs may
need to be recharged more
frequently.

Refueling of Arctic RD is quick,
and frequency is not affected by
temperatures.

According to Consumer Reports:
“…we found that short trips in the cold with frequent stops and the
need to reheat the cabin saps 50 percent of the range [of an EV].”11
“Under the coldest conditions, the rate of charging [of an EV] was
roughly three times slower than at warmer temperatures.”12

Fiber Cellulosic Ethanol
In addition to starch ethanol,
we use an enzymatic process
to convert waste fibers into
cellulosic ethanol, a secondgeneration fuel.

"When [cellulosic ethanol
is] used as a vehicle
fuel, it can support deep
reductions in [life cycle]
greenhouse gas emissions,
with a carbon footprint 73%
smaller than conventional
gasoline." 15
Compared to gasoline’s CI of
approximately 100 gCO2e/MJ
and EV's average CI of about
50 gCO2e/MJ (depending
upon battery components,
manufacturing place and the
electric grid),14 cellulosic ethanol
has a CI in the high 20s.15
When combined with carbon
sequestration, the cellulosic
ethanol product can have a
CI in the single digits, further
increasing the value of ethanol
in low-carbon markets.

Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

11

Tailpipe CO2 Onboard Capture System
Valero continues to support Southwest Research Institute (SwRI) in the development of a solid CO2 separation
membrane to remove CO2 from the exhaust gas of internal combustion engine vehicles, with the objective of
providing an affordable solution to lowering GHG emissions. To date, SwRI has improved upon the initial concept
and demonstrated performance enhancements through design and optimization efforts.
Plans are in place for prototype scaling and testing,
and we have filed patent applications for several novel
technologies. If successful on a commercial scale, cars
built with this technology could compete with EVs as
a low-cost solution for reducing tailpipe emissions.
In addition, even greater benefits to life cycle GHG
emissions reductions are possible if low-carbon fuels are
used in combination with the onboard capture system.

Carbon Capture
and Storage or
CCS
CCS is a proven
technology that has
been in commercial
use for decades in
the oil and gas and
fertilizer industries. It
involves three steps:
1. Capture:
Separation of CO2
from other gases
produced at industrial
process facilities.
2. Transport:

Separated CO2
dehydrated and
compressed prior to
being transported by
pipeline, rail, trucks or
ships for storage.
3. Storage:
CO2 destined for
permanent storage
and injected into deep
rock formations.

12

Industrial Carbon Capture — Valero first used carbon capture technology in 2013
at its refinery in Port Arthur, Texas. Approximately 1 million metric tons of CO2 per
year is captured from two third-party hydrogen plants that produce hydrogen
from natural gas.
Large-Scale CCS —
Valero has agreed
to participate as a
shipper on Summit
Carbon Solutions'
proposed pipeline
project by connecting
eight of Valero's
ethanol plants and
enabling the capture
and storage of
approximately
3.1 million metric tons
CO2 annually, which
could potentially
reduce Valero's
ethanol's CI by
approximately 40%.

NORTH
DAKOTA

PROPOSED
SUMMIT PIPELINE

MINNESOTA

AURORA

SOUTH
DAKOTA

WELCOME
LAKOTA
HARTLEY

CHARLES CITY

FORT DODGE
ALBERT
CITY

NEBRASKA

ALBION

IOWA

Stand-Alone CCS — We are continuing to evaluate and develop stand-alone
carbon sequestration projects at several of our Eastern ethanol plants, potentially
capturing more than 1 million metric tons of CO2 a year. Certain of our ethanol
plants are located near geology believed to be suitable for successful CCS
projects, making them potentially attractive for development.

Low-Carbon

About Low-Carbon Fuels
What is carbon intensity or CI?
CI means the quantity of life cycle GHG emissions for a particular fuel per unit of transportation energy delivered,
which is expressed in grams of carbon dioxide equivalent per megajoule (gCO2e/MJ).

What is life cycle analysis or LCA?
It is a cradle-to-grave analysis. In the case
of liquid transportation fuels, life cycle
analysis (LCA) means calculation of the
aggregate quantity of GHG emissions
related to the full fuel life cycle, including
all stages of fuel and feedstock production
and distribution, from feedstock generation
or extraction through the distribution,
delivery and use of the finished fuel by
the ultimate consumer, as depicted in the
graphic to the right.

FEEDSTOCK
PRODUCTION AND
TRANSPORTATION

FUEL PRODUCTION
AND DISTRIBUTION

CROP-BASED AND
WASTE

LOW-CARBON FUEL
FACILITY

Energy Inputs
Chemical Inputs

Process Energy Use
Material Inputs

USE OF THE
FINISHED FUEL
TRANSPORTATION
FUEL

Do low-carbon fuels reduce GHG emissions?
Yes, low-carbon fuels reduce life cycle GHG emissions. In the case of corn ethanol, our product offers at least 30%
lower life cycle GHG emissions, 2 compared with petroleum gasoline. The reduction percentage could be higher
if certain feedstocks such as corn kernel fiber are used or if the energy intensity in ethanol's production or supply
chain decreases.
Depending on the feedstocks and the LCA pathway, renewable diesel offers up to 80% lower life cycle GHG
emissions, 2 compared with traditional diesel. The reduction percentage changes depending on the LCA
methodology or pathway, feedstocks and energy intensity in the supply chain, such as feedstock gathering
mileage or distribution mileage of finished product. In addition, global low-carbon fuel programs calculate life
cycle GHG emissions with different assumptions, which can also affect the differential between the CI of renewable
diesel and the CI of the diesel benchmark.

Are there enough feedstocks to
produce low-carbon fuels?

Appetites that fuel our low-carbon fuels — More than
150,000 restaurants, supermarket chains, casinos,
theme parks, stadiums and arenas nationwide
provide used cooking oil to our joint venture member
for conversion into renewable diesel, much of which is
processed at our renewable diesel facilities.16

Our ethanol and renewable diesel plants
are in advantaged locations. In the
case of ethanol, the U.S. Midwest offers
abundant corn supply. Our renewable diesel
production is competitively located in the
U.S. Gulf Coast with access to domestic and

global feedstocks, which allows for flexibility
of supply of used cooking oil, animal fats,
soybean oil and corn oil. In addition, the
other member of our renewable diesel joint
venture is the world's largest renderer, which
provides a source of animal fats.

Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

13

Do low-carbon fuels have tailpipe
emissions?

Are Valero's GHG emissions of low-carbon
fuels audited and certified?

Yes, low-carbon fuels combust just like the fossil
fuel counterparts. However, low-carbon fuels have
lower life cycle emissions than fossil fuels due to the
biological origins of the feedstock. For instance, in
life cycle GHG emissions calculations, the tailpipe
emissions released from combusting ethanol are
offset by the carbon uptake during new corn crop
growth. As a result, vehicles running on low-carbon
fuels produce less net CO2 per mile traveled than
vehicles running on conventional fuels.

Yes, our low-carbon fuels are audited and certified not
only as part of the limited assurance engagement by
external auditors but also by independent auditors
representing the countries, states or provinces where we
sell low-carbon fuels.

Do low-carbon fuels displace fossil fuels?
Yes, California, one of the world's largest consumers
of low-carbon fuels, has reported that, even with
increased population and economic growth, more
than 44% of transportation diesel and more than 6%
of gasoline have been displaced by low-carbon fuels
since 2011.17

Where are Valero's low-carbon fuels
sold?

Our low-carbon fuels are sold around the world,
including continental Europe, Scandinavia, the U.K.,
Latin America, Mexico, Canada and the United States,
especially in California, Oregon and Washington. We
believe that our ability to supply these low-carbon
fuels can play an important role for governments
and others to achieve their GHG emissions reduction
targets. See table below for global low-carbon fuel
regulations and table on page 15 for global SAF.

In the case of California’s LCFS, each certified pathway
follows very stringent rules and certifications processes.
As of 2023, California’s LCFS had certified more than
1,350 fuel pathways of low-carbon fuel CI calculations.
Pathways are “[v]ariations in feedstock types, origin,
raw material production processing efficiencies and
transportation,” all of which contribute to an individual
producer’s fuel pathway CI18 and are independently
verified. California's certifications are based upon ISO
14064-3 and 14065. The EU requires certification bodies
be accredited to ISO 17065 and 14065 and for audits to be
conducted in accordance with ISO 19011 or the equivalent.
In 2023, more than 50 independent verifications were
conducted on our low-carbon fuels production, some of
which included a partial or full traceability review of the
supply chain.

Why don’t you use the GHG Protocol to
measure the carbon content of your lowcarbon businesses?

We don’t use it because the GHG Protocol is inconsistent
with global low-carbon fuel regulations, which base CI
calculations on LCA and account for the full fuel life cycle.
For instance, combustion of biofuels is not part of the
accounting of Scope 3, Category 11 in the GHG Protocol.

Global Low-Carbon Fuel Regulations19
2030 GHG Emissions
Reduction Target

Net Zero GHG
Emissions Target

Primary Transportation Fuel Policy
Mechanism

2030 Transportation Fuels Goal

California

40%

Net zero by 2045

Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS)

Reduce the CI of transportation fuels
by at least 20%

Canada

40 to 45%

Net zero by 2050

Clean Fuel Regulations (CFR)

Reduce the CI of transportation fuels by 15%

EU

55%

Net zero by 2050

Renewable Energy Directive III (REDIII)

Replace 29% of transport fuels with renewable
energy, or reduce sector GHG intensity by 14.5%

UK

68%

Net zero by 2050

Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation
(RTFO)

Replace 19% of transport fuels
with renewable fuels

Other
Policies
in Place

Potential
Policies

14

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Oregon’s Clean Fuels Program requires a 20% CI reduction by 2030 and a 37% reduction by 2035.
Washington State’s Clean Fuel Standard requires a 20% CI reduction by 2034.
New Mexico enacted a Clean Fuel Standard in 2024, for implementation in 2026.
British Columbia's LCFS requires a 30% CI reduction by 2030.
Norway has a biofuel blending mandate for diesel of 40% by 2030.
Sweden currently has a diesel GHG reduction requirement of 66% by 2030.
Finland aims for 34% of transport fuels to be biofuels by 2030.

• Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, Nevada and Vermont are considering low-carbon fuel
programs.

Low-Carbon

Indirect Land Use Change (ILUC) negatively impacts certain domestic crop-based biofuels, benefits
certain imported biofuels, and does not fairly penalize land used for all renewable energy and mining.
Most of the biofuels policies commonly assess ILUC penalties to account for indirect land conversion that potentially
result from increased biofuels demand. These ILUC penalties – which tend to be fixed values rather than reflecting
the actual practices of the feedstock producer – can account for more than half of a biofuel's carbon intensity and
be the ultimate determiner of the fuel's qualification under low-carbon programs. As shown in the charts below,
the EPA Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) penalizes soybean with an ILUC of 80% of the entire CI calculation, and corn
ethanol with an ILUC of 36% of the CI. While California’s LCFS penalizes soybean with 47% of the CI and corn ethanol
with an ILUC of 28% of the CI of the fuel. These are among the highest of such penalties imposed on U.S. biofuels
programs. By contrast, the same models assign a much lower ILUC penalty to Brazilian sugarcane ethanol. For
instance, the RFS penalizes sugarcane ethanol by only 13% of the CI20 and the LCFS assigns the lower penalty of all
biofuels to sugarcane ethanol. 21
Corn Ethanol/SAF

Soybean Oil BD/RD/SAF

EPA RFS

EPA RFS

CA LCFS

CA LCFS

Canada CFR

Canada CFR

ICAO CORSIA

ICAO CORSIA

40B BTC

40B BTC

0

20

non-ILUC

40

60

CI (gCO2e/MJ)

80

Potential reduction for ag practices

100
ILUC

0

10

non-ILUC

20

30

40

CI (gCO2e/MJ)

50

60

70

Potential reduction for ag practices

ILUC

See Notes 22 , 23 , 24 , 25, 26 , 27 and 28 on page 78 for chart details.

Canada’s CFR excludes ILUC from the model due to limitations such as lack of data and high uncertainty. 24 25
Inconsistently, ILUC penalties are not extended to the installation of solar arrays, wind turbines, or the extraction of
minerals to support EV batteries, despite their potential for significant direct and induced land use changes. For
instance, the Department of Energy projects that 10.4 million acres of solar arrays will be needed to help decarbonize
the nation’s power grid – as much as 83% of that acreage will likely be farmland, 29 which will need to be replaced.
Valero supports policies that eliminate inconsistencies in emissions calculations that disadvantage
U.S. domestic crop-based biofuels. If ILUC is not entirely excluded (as in the case of solar arrays and
stripped mining), at least, long-standing farmland in the U.S. Midwest should not be treated unfavorably
compared with foreign crop-based fuels coming from potentially new deforested land.

Global SAF Mandates30
Jurisdiction
CORSIA
EU
France

SAF Mandates
Program aims to offset growth in CO2 emissions from international aviation above 85% of 2019 CO2 emissions. Participation is
voluntary over 2021-2026 and becomes mandatory for participating nations starting in 2027.
SAF mandate of 2% in 2025, 6% in 2030, 20% in 2035, 34% in 2040, 42% in 2045 and 70% in 2050.
SAF mandate of 1% in 2022, 1.5% in 2024 and 2% in 2025.

Germany

National implementation of RED II includes power-to-liquid. SAF sub-mandate of 0.5% in 2026, 1% in 2028 and 2% in 2030.

Malaysia

SAF mandate of 1% in 2026 and 47% in 2050.

Norway
Singapore
Sweden
British Columbia
(Canada)
UK

SAF mandate of 0.5% in 2020 and 30% in 2030.
SAF mandate of 1% in 2026 on outbound flights, possibly rising to 3%-5% in 2030, depending on availability and adoption.
SAF mandate of 1% in 2021 and 30% in 2030.
SAF mandate of 1% in 2028, 2% in 2029 and 3% in 2030.
SAF mandate of 2% in 2025, 10% in 2030 and 22% in 2040. Expected to be adopted in 2024.

Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

15

Climate Solutions Should be
Efficient -EV Mandates are Not
We are often asked by stakeholders about EV mandates and how liquid transportation fuels compared with EVs in
terms of performance, affordability and environmental impacts.

EV charging infrastructure is lagging and requires costly changes in existing power grids.
• Achieving the EPA’s demand of widespread EV adoption is estimated to cost around $1 trillion in grid updates by
2035.31
• Fewer than 10% of American consumers consider current EV charging infrastructure to be sufficient.32
• Estimates show that it could take $55 billion to meet charging needs, but the current U.S. Administration has
only set aside $7.5 billion.33

Renewable diesel is a drop-in fuel and can result in lower life cycle GHG
emissions than EVs. It is 100% compatible with existing diesel engines, so
no new infrastructure is needed.
Light-Duty Vehicle Emits Fewer
Emissions than an Electric Vehicle34

Diesel Engine with Renewable Diesel
Outperforms Battery Electric Vehicle34

(U.S. light-duty vehicle life cycle emissions)

(U.S. heavy-duty long-haul vehicle life cycle emissions)

2022 Southwest Research Institute Study

Tons CO2

g CO 2 / mile
300

"Zero emissions"
vehicles are not zero emissions

250

1, 4 0 0

60% fewer emissions
than an EV after 1,000,000
miles traveled

1, 2 0 0

800

150

600

100

400

50

200
Battery Electric
Vehicle

Electricity/
Fuel Emissions

Diesel Engine with
Renewable Diesel
(waste oil based)

0

Embedded Emissions 500,000 Miles
(zero miles traveled)
Traveled

Battery Electric
Vehicle

Embedded
Emissions

The amount of critical minerals used in one battery
electric vehicle could be used to make 6 plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles or 90 hybrid electric vehicles.
The overall carbon reduction of those 90 hybrids over
their lifetimes is 37 times as much as a single battery
electric vehicle.35

16

1, 6 0 0

1, 0 0 0

200

0

2022 Southwest Research Institute Study

1 Battery Electric
Vehicle

1,000,000 Miles
Traveled

Diesel Engine with
Renewable Diesel

6 Plug-in Hybrid
Electric Vehicles

90 Hybrid Electric
Vehicles

Low-Carbon

EV mandates are infeasible and require a seismic surge in mineral production (i.e.,
lithium's global demand is predicted to increase 40-fold from 2020 to 2040).36
• Foreign countries of concern dominate the entire EV battery supply chain (including mining, material
processing, cell components, battery cells and EV manufacturing). Certain locations where these activities
take place have been associated with allegations of human rights violations, forced and child labor, and
environmental degradation claims.37
• The current U.S. Administration is attempting to shift mining and processing of critical minerals to domestic
sites with more regulations, but these new mining sites often face significant opposition and permitting
obstacles, and could take an average of 16.5 years to be fully functional.38
China dominates the downstream and midstream global EV battery supply chain36
Geographical distribution of the global EV battery supply chain, 2023

Mining

100%

Material processing

Cell components

Battery cells

EVs

Source:
International
Energy Agency
(2024), Global
Critical
Minerals
Outlook 2024,
page 30, IEA,
Paris.

75%
50%
25%
0%

Li

Ni
China

Co
Europe

Gr
United States

Li

Ni
Japan

Co
Korea

Gr
DRC

Cathode Anode
Australia

Chile

Batteries

Indonesia

Russia

EVs
Other

Low-carbon fuels such as renewable diesel and ethanol are
available today and can reduce GHG emissions right now.
EV mandates are not affordable for many working families and will limit their physical
and economic mobility.
• Current plans for EVs in California impair access to reliable
and affordable vehicles for low- and moderate-income
communities.39

46% of U.S. EV drivers want to go
back to gas-powered cars.40

• EV mandates will disproportionately affect lower-income people
by pushing them out to farther suburbs, increasing costs of living,
and limiting job opportunities and school options.39

More than 68% of U.S. adults believe
a mix of fuels should be used.41

"Our community members cannot afford $40,000 electric vehicles, or pay
more than $15,000 to replace the batteries in a 'used' electric vehicle."
- The Two Hundred, civil right leaders committed to closing the wealth gap
of hard-working families and individuals.

Instead of EV mandates, we support the use of transportation choices
and are currently supporting the development of a wide range
of solutions to reduce GHG emissions, from cellulosic ethanol to
sustainable aviation fuel and a tailpipe CO2 onboard capture system.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

17

GHG Emissions

42

Value Chain Analysis

With the intent to address the demands of some stakeholders to disclose Scope 3 GHG emissions, we conducted a
value chain analysis. The analysis proved to be complicated and yielded insufficient data to meaningfully quantify
GHG emissions related to the use of the products we manufacture and highlighted the difficulty in accurately
assessing upstream and downstream carbon emissions.
With approximately three million transactions conducted
yearly with more than 3,000 counterparties upstream and
downstream of our refineries (for feedstock purchases
and product sales, respectively), we found that many of
our crude oil feedstock suppliers provided limited or no
public disclosure of Scopes 1 and 2 GHG emissions. Similarly, an analysis of our more than 2,800 customers revealed
that many, including some of the largest purchasers of our fuels, have limited or no public disclosure of Scopes 1 and
2 GHG emissions. Furthermore, as a merchant refiner, we are unable to ascertain the final use of all of our products.
Although most of our products are sold as transportation fuels, some of our products have multiple potential uses.
For example, some of our products, including naphtha and liquefied petroleum gases, have several downstream uses
aside from combustion, such as in plastics and petrochemicals production.
After careful consideration, the lack of publicly available GHG emissions disclosures proved to be an insurmountable
hurdle for accurately calculating our value chain GHG emissions. Another limitation of the value chain analysis and
methodologies, such as the GHG Protocol, is its inability to take into consideration the life cycle GHG emissions
benefits from low-carbon fuels.
To address the limitations of the value chain analysis, we introduced a metric called Use of Product GHG Emissions
Intensity, which is the GHG emissions intensity of the assumed use of company-wide products on a per barrel basis,
and recently, we added the same metric on a per unit of energy basis. Further details on these metrics are provided
on pages 20 and 21.

Independent Limited Assurance

Since 2021, we have engaged one or more independent third parties to evaluate, validate and/or verify our GHG
emissions disclosures, which we intend to continue completing annually going forward. In 2024, this included
limited assurance on/of:
• Company-wide 2023 GHG emissions (Scopes 1 and 2), including refining, renewable diesel and ethanol.
• Company-wide 2023 GHG emissions reductions achieved with our renewable diesel and ethanol
production, as well as the blending of and credits from low-carbon fuels.
• Company-wide 2023 Use of Product GHG Emissions Intensity per barrel and per unit of energy.
• The validation of our 2035 GHG emissions target.
Copies of independent limited assurance verifications can be found on our website at www.valero.com >
Investors > ESG > Other Reports. All calculations were found to be science-based and in conformity with
acceptable engineering practices.

18

GHG Emissions

Total Reductions and Displacements

32.3

In 2022, three years ahead of schedule, we achieved
our 2025 GHG emissions target to reduce and
displace the equivalent to 63% of the tonnage from
our global refinery GHG emissions (Scopes 1 and 2). In
2023, we continued to exceed this target.

Million MT CO2e

2025 Short-Term Target1

Refinery GHG Emissions
in 2011 (Scopes 1 & 2)

63%
Target

2023

2035 Medium-Term Target1
Our GHG emissions target reflects our unique strategy. Refinery absolute reductions and our low-carbon
projects are expected to generate reductions and displacements equivalent to 100% of the tonnage from our
global refinery GHG emissions (Scopes 1 and 2) by 2035. Each component below showcases our strategy:

2038 Update
By 2038, refinery absolute reductions and our low-carbon projects are expected to generate reductions and
displacements equivalent to 100% of the tonnage of the GHG emissions from our refining, renewable diesel and
ethanol business segments (Scopes 1 and 2), including from refining, ethanol and renewable diesel production.

2050 Long-Term Ambition
By 2050, Valero has an ambition to reduce and displace company-wide GHG emissions for Scopes 1, 2, 3 and 4
by more than 45 million metric tons CO2e.

Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

19

Our Progress up to 2023
Scope 1 Intensity - GHG emissions from the refining process relative to refining peers
Peer Range

55

Metric
CO22eeper
perthousand
thousand
BOE
metric tons
tons CO
BOE

The chart to the right
compares Valero’s
global refinery Scope 1
intensity in million metric
tons CO2 e per thousand
barrels of oil equivalent
(BOE), relative to peers’
performance using
peers’ publicly available
disclosures, including
annual reports on Forms
10-K and sustainability
reports.

Valero

50
45
40
35
30
25
20

Refining peer group includes PSX,
MPC, DINO and PBF.

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

GLOBAL REFINING

2021

2022

2023

Refining throughput of crude oil and other feedstocks (million BOE)

1,017.3

1,077.8

1,087.3

GHG emissions, Scope 1 (million metric tons CO2e)

23.7

24.8

24.9

GHG emissions, Scope 2 Market-based (million metric tons CO2e)

4.9

4.9

5.1

GHG emissions, Scope 2 Location-based (million metric tons CO2e)

5.0

5.0

5.2

2021

2022

2023

GHG emissions, Scope 1 (million metric tons CO2e)

2.1

2.1

2.3

GHG emissions, Scope 2 Market-based (million metric tons CO2e)

0.5

0.5

0.5

GHG emissions, Scope 2 Location-based (million metric tons CO2e)

0.5

0.5

0.5

GHG emissions reduction achieved with displacements (million metric tons CO2e)

16.7

20.5

22.4

COMPANY-WIDE GHG EMISSIONS INTENSITY FROM THE USE OF PRODUCTS

2021

2022

2023

266

266

253

51

51

48

LOW-CARBON FUELS

Use of Product GHG emissions Intensity per barrel (Kg CO2e / bbl)
Use of Product GHG emissions Intensity per unit of energy (g CO2e / MJ)

20

GHG Emissions

GHG Emissions Methodologies
There is not currently a standardized methodology for calculating GHG emissions. For instance, direct GHG
emissions that result from on-site sources controlled and owned by the firm, commonly referred to as Scope 1,
can be calculated using different parameters and methodologies. Another well-known example is the calculation
of Scope 3, which is inherently unreliable because of the varying interpretations of indirect emissions that are a
consequence of the activities of the company, but are outside of its control.
At Valero, we have complied with mandated GHG emissions reporting requirements for more than a decade. As a
result, we have established a robust process to disclose our GHG emissions inventory following the GHG emissions
regulatory frameworks in the U.S., Canada and the U.K., and global LCA regulations applicable to low-carbon fuels.
The methodologies we use to calculate our GHG emissions reporting are described below:
Direct GHG emissions (also known as Scope 1): corporate
disclosure of our Scope 1 GHG emissions from fuel combustion
and hydrogen production sources at our 15 petroleum refineries
can be estimated following the GHG reporting program
obligations under U.S. 40 CFR Part 98 (Subparts C, P, Y and PP);
the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 of 19
December 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse
gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council; and Quebec – Q-2, r. 15 Regulation respecting mandatory reporting of certain emissions
of contaminants into the atmosphere.
We also calculate and separately disclose the direct GHG
emissions (Scope 1) from our 12 ethanol plants and 2 renewable
diesel plants following the GHG emissions reporting program
obligations under U.S. 40 CFR 98 (Subpart C).
Indirect GHG emissions from the consumption of energy and
steam purchased by the organization for its use (also known
as Scope 2): to calculate Scope 2, we follow the guidance
from two approaches in the GHG Protocol: market-based and
location-based. We calculate Scope 2 for our three segments:
refining, ethanol and renewable diesel.
Scope 1 Intensity: to calculate the GHG emissions from the
refinery process per unit of throughput, we divide the global
refinery Scope 1 in million metric tons CO2e (as described above)
by thousand BOE. Refining peer group includes PSX, MPC, DINO
and PBF. Similarly, we calculated peers' Scopes 1 intensity by
dividing refining Scope 1 by refining throughput disclosures,
which were sourced from public filings, such as annual reports
on Forms 10-K and sustainability reports.
Indirect GHG emissions intensity from the use of products
on a per barrel or per unit of energy basis: there is not
currently a standardized methodology for calculating Scope
3 GHG emissions, and the inherent unreliability of Scope 3
calculations renders such metric of limited value. At Valero,
we have complied with mandated GHG emissions reporting
requirements for more than a decade related to GHG emissions
of the use of our products, as required by the EPA. Therefore, for
the calculation of the numerator we follow the U.S. 40 CFR Part
98 (Subpart MM), which includes the complete combustion
of each petroleum product and natural gas liquid produced,
used as feedstock, imported, or exported during the calendar
year, based upon the carbon content of each material. The
numerator includes both the disclosure from our U.S. refineries
as required under U.S. 40 CFR Part 98 (Subpart MM) and from
our refineries in Canada and the U.K., in conformance with
U.S. 40 CFR Part 98 (Subpart MM). Because it is a companywide reporting, the calculation of this metric includes the GHG
emissions from low-carbon fuels displacement of petroleum
fuels (“displacements”) and the absolute GHG emissions
reductions from CCS, if any.
The denominator in the intensity calculation in kg CO2e per
thousand BOE is the company’s refining throughput, ethanol
production and renewable diesel sales. The denominator in
the intensity calculation per megajoule (MJ) is the total energy
from the company’s refining throughput, ethanol production

and renewable diesel sales using energy factors (MJ/gal)
from the California Air Resources Board’s Greenhouse Gas,
Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation 3.0
model (CA-GREET3.0 model) used by California’s Low Carbon
Fuel Standard (LCFS).
Displacements: this represents the tonnage reduction
of GHG emissions equivalent (CO2e) that result from the
substitution of petroleum fuels with the production of,
blending of and credits from low-carbon fuels, including,
but not limited to, products that we currently produce or
are expected to produce as part of our publicly available
GHG emissions targets (such as ethanol, cellulosic ethanol,
renewable diesel, renewable naphtha, renewable propane
and SPK or neat SAF), as well as low-carbon fuels we procure,
including ethanol and biodiesel. This calculation is based
on a comparison of low-carbon fuels LCA and the fossil fuel
benchmark LCA, which could vary depending on the product
and/or the jurisdiction.
For our production of renewable diesel, the CI estimations
are based on the actual market-based CI assigned to the
product from the verifications and audits from jurisdictions
where renewable diesel production was sold. In the case
of our production of ethanol, the CI estimations are based
on the Argonne National Laboratory GREET3.0 2021 model.
Regarding the CI estimations for ethanol and biodiesel
that we procured to fulfill our blending obligations, we used
the Argonne National Laboratory GREET3.0 2021 (ethanol)
and 2019 (biodiesel) models and published papers. When
calculating the displacements from blending and to avoid
double counting, our low-carbon fuel production that
contributes to our blending obligation is excluded.
Under the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board's (SASB)
Standards Application Guidance 3.0 Reporting Boundaries,
as the operator of the consolidated entity, displacements
include the entire production of renewable diesel, renewable
naphtha, renewable propane and SPK or neat SAF of the
consolidated entities that we operate.
Scope 4: this calculation of avoided GHG emissions is used
only in the 2050 Long-Term Ambition. It is informed by the
GHG Protocol for Project Accounting and does not follow the
LCA methodology. The calculation is based upon Valero's
total production of, blending of and credits from ethanol,
and sales of, blending of and credits from renewable diesel,
renewable naphtha and biodiesel. The low-carbon fuels
volumes were converted to energy-equivalent volumes of
the corresponding petroleum products and multiplied by the
emissions factors of the petroleum fuels. Energy densities
and emissions factors were sourced from the CA-GREET3.0
model and U.S. 40 CFR Part 98 (Subpart MM). Under the SASB's
Standards Application Guidance 3.0 Reporting Boundaries,
as the operator of the consolidated entity, our avoided GHG
emissions include the entire production of renewable diesel,
renewable naphtha, renewable propane and SPK or neat SAF
of the consolidated entities that we operate.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report •

21
